
The New York Times app has all the stuff that you may not have seen.
纽约时报应用程序拥有你可能没看过的一切内容。

The way the tabs are at the top with all of the different sections.
顶部的标签页展示了所有不同的栏目。

I can immediately navigate to something that matches what I'm feeling.
我可以立刻导航到与我的感受匹配的内容。

I owe the games always.
我总想玩游戏。

Don't want the money, don't want the word.
不想要钱，也不想要文字。

I love how much content it exposed me to.
我喜欢它让我接触到这么多内容。

Things that I never would have thought to turn to a news app for.
我从未想过会从新闻应用程序中寻找的东西。

This app is essential.
这个应用程序是必不可少的。

The New York Times app.
纽约时报应用程序。

All of the times, all in one place.
所有时刻，汇聚一处。

Download it now at nytimes.com slash app.
立即在 nytimes.com/app 下载。

Amongst philosophers who study dementia, there's this story that gets told over and over again.
在研究痴呆症的哲学家当中，有一个故事被反复讲述。

And it's about a woman named Margo.
这个故事是关于一位名叫玛戈的女性。

Margo was a 55 year old woman who suffered from early onset Alzheimer's disease.
玛戈是一位55岁的女性，患有早发性阿尔茨海默病。

She couldn't recognize anyone around her.
她认不出周围的任何人。

She spent her days painting and listening to music.
她每天画画、听音乐。

She read mystery novels too.
她也读悬疑小说。

Often the same book day after day.
经常日复一日地读同一本书。

The mystery always remained mysterious because she would forget it.
谜团始终是谜团，因为她会忘记。

But despite her on this, or maybe even because of it, Margo was very happy.
但尽管如此，或者正因如此，玛戈非常快乐。

The Margo story presents philosophers with this riddle.
玛戈的故事给哲学家提出了一个谜题。

Imagine that years ago when Margo was fully competent, she wrote out a formal document explaining that if she ever developed Alzheimer's disease, she would not want any life-saving medical treatment.
想象一下，多年前当玛戈心智健全时，她写下了一份正式文件，说明如果她患上阿尔茨海默病，她不愿接受任何救命的医疗。

And more than that, she would want to be killed, as soon and as painlessly as possible.
不仅如此，她还希望被尽快、无痛苦地杀死。

This poses that question, which version of the Margo should be listened to, the then Margo before she got sick, the then Margo who never would want to live that way, or the now Margo who's sitting before us and who is by all accounts, happy, in other words, who is the authentic Margo?
这就提出了一个问题：应该听从哪个版本的玛戈？是生病前的那个玛戈，那个绝不想以那种方式活着的玛戈，还是坐在我们面前、据所有人所说很快乐的玛戈？换句话说，谁才是真实的玛戈？

New York Times, I'm Michael Babaro.
纽约时报，我是迈克尔·巴巴罗。

This is the Daily.
这里是《每日新闻》。

Across the United States, millions of families are confronting a seemingly impossible question.
全美各地，数百万家庭正面临一个看似不可能的问题。

When dementia changes a relative, how much should they accommodate their new personality, and their new desires?
当痴呆症改变了一位亲人时，他们应该在多大程度上适应其新的性格和新的欲望？

Today, Times Magazine correspondent Katie Engelhardt, with one family's experience.
今天，《纽约时报杂志》记者凯蒂·恩格尔哈特带来一个家庭的经历。

It's Friday, January 26th.
今天是1月26日，星期五。

Katie, how did you first discover this story?
凯蒂，你是如何最初发现这个故事的？

So, I spent a number of years reporting on issues related to older Americans, and I've been particularly interested in dementia and cognitive impairment.
我花了好几年时间报道与美国老年人相关的问题，对痴呆症和认知障碍尤其感兴趣。

And this story actually found me because I've been writing about the subject.
而实际上，是这个故事找到了我，因为我一直在写这个主题。

I was receiving a lot of emails from people who had dementia, who's loved ones had it, and there was one that really stood out to me.
我收到了很多来自痴呆症患者或其亲人的邮件，其中有一封特别引起了我的注意。

And that was an email from two women, Chris and Julie Norellius, who were writing to tell me the story of their mother.
那是一封来自两位女性——克里斯和朱莉·诺雷利乌斯的邮件，她们写信告诉我她们母亲的故事。

And what was the story that they told you?
她们告诉你的故事是什么？

The story that they described was, effectively, one of elder abuse.
她们描述的故事，实际上是一起虐待老人的案件。

In this case, what they were describing wasn't physical abuse, or even kind of direct financial abuse, but something a little softer, more like psychological pressure, more like taking advantage of someone's cognitive weakness in order to convince that person that she wants something she doesn't really.
在这个案例中，她们描述的并非身体虐待，甚至也不是那种直接的财务虐待，而是一种更温和的东西，更像是心理压力，更像是利用某人的认知弱点，来说服那个人相信自己想要一些她并不真正想要的东西。

But the more I reported on this story, the more complicated it seems.
但我越报道这个故事，它似乎就越复杂。

This wasn't a straightforward story of elder abuse with good guys and bad guys.
这不是一个简单的好人与坏人的虐待老人故事。

This was a lot more complicated.
这要复杂得多。

We can all hear each other.
我们都能听到彼此。

Yeah, yeah.
是的，是的。

Great.
很好。

Thank you so much for being willing to try to get him.
非常感谢你愿意尝试让他来。

So the first thing I did was call these sisters, Chris and Julie Norellius, and that really started two years of conversation with them.
所以我做的第一件事就是给这对姐妹——克里斯和朱莉·诺雷利乌斯——打电话，这真正开始了与她们长达两年的对话。

Sure, starting someplace, Chris and Julia separated by a few years, but they act almost like twins.
当然，先说说基础情况，克里斯和朱莉相差几岁，但她们的行为举止几乎像双胞胎。

Oh, wow.
哦，哇。

Well, they look similar.
嗯，她们长得很像。

They have virtually the same voice.
她们的声音几乎一模一样。

They complete each other sentences.
她们会互相接话。

And they told me a lot about their family, the Norellius family.
她们告诉了我很多关于她们家庭——诺雷利乌斯家族——的情况。

I grew up in Dennis and Iowa, a town of around 8,000 people surrounded on all sides by corn fields.
我在爱荷华州的丹尼森长大，那是一个大约8000人的小镇，四周被玉米地包围。

Their father Bill was sort of a prominent figure around town.
她们的父亲比尔在镇上算是个显赫人物。

He was a lawyer and a landowner.
他是一名律师，也是地主。

But we spent most of our time talking about their mother, day in Norellius.
但我们大部分时间都在谈论她们的母亲——黛恩·诺雷利乌斯。

My mom was really the center of our family.
我妈妈真的是我们家的中心。

The sisters described their mother as really the backbone of this happy American family.
姐妹俩将母亲描述为这个幸福美国家庭的支柱。

Dad worked all the time, and so it was up to mom to take care of everything else.
爸爸一直在工作，所以由妈妈负责其他一切。

And it was a great childhood.
那是一个很棒的童年。

She was my memory.
她就是我的记忆。

Competent.
能干。

And you know, a big presence in the area.
而且，你知道，她在当地很有影响力。

She served on a school board.
她在学校董事会任职。

She drove a school bus.
她开过校车。

She was on the state library board.
她曾在州图书馆委员会任职。

But she was also a very traditional woman.
但她也是一位非常传统的女性。

You know, she was a woman of her time.
你知道，她是她那个时代的女性。

Mom and dad were married in 1957.
妈妈和爸爸于1957年结婚。

So it was very much in 1950's wife at home with the children husband working.
所以，这非常符合1950年代的模式：妻子在家带孩子，丈夫工作。

And she was by her daughter's admission quite happy in that role.
而且，据她女儿承认，她在那个角色中相当快乐。

It was all it was very proper and mom just cried in that.
一切都非常得体，妈妈对此非常满足。

And probably would have continued that way if things hadn't derailed.
如果事情没有偏离轨道，可能还会继续这样下去。

What exactly happened?
到底发生了什么？

Things for Diane really changed in 2011.
黛安的状况在2011年真正发生了变化。

Her husband Bill died of complications from a broken hip after 53 years of marriage.
她的丈夫比尔在结婚53年后，因髋部骨折并发症去世。

You have to remember that mom went to nursing school.
你得记住，妈妈上过护士学校。

God out and pretty much married dad.
她毕业了，然后差不多就嫁给了爸爸。

I mean, she was in her early 20s when she had me.
我的意思是，她生我的时候才二十岁出头。

So she had never lived alone been independent or anything.
所以她从未独自生活过，从未独立过，或其他什么。

So what she loses is man who has been there for her whole life.
所以她失去的是一个在她一生中一直陪伴着她的人。

Literally, her adult life.
真的，就是她的整个成年生活。

I think she was like lost.
我想她像是迷失了。

I mean, she pretended like, don't worry kids, I'll be fine.
我的意思是，她假装说：“别担心孩子们，我会没事的。”

But I don't think she knew how to do it by herself, especially without a man.
但我不认为她知道如何自己处理，尤其没有男人的情况下。

And by doing it, you mean.
你说的“处理”是指。

Live her life like she made it out like, oh, I feel kind of free now.
过她的生活，她假装说：“哦，我现在感觉有点自由了。”

And I can go and do anything I want, but she really didn't.
我可以去做任何我想做的事。”但她并没有。

She just watched television.
她只是看电视。

And then Diane started losing more people.
然后黛安开始失去更多人。

To me, the next thing was my brother's health crisis.
对我来说，接下来是我哥哥的健康危机。

Her son Eric died of cancer at 55.
她的儿子埃里克在55岁时死于癌症。

That's her only son.
那是她唯一的儿子。

That's one of her children.
那是她的一个孩子。

Her daughter Julie, who had lived next door, divorced and moved to Colorado.
她的女儿朱莉，之前住在隔壁，离婚后搬到了科罗拉多州。

Her support group has kind of turned mine.
她的支持团体基本上消失了。

I think abandoned her.
我觉得抛弃了她。

She was seeing herself alone.
她发现自己孤身一人。

And then almost all of a sudden, a new man appears in her life.
然后几乎突然之间，一个新男人出现在她的生活中。

And then a long came Denzel.
然后丹泽尔就出现了。

Denzel Nelson.
丹泽尔·尼尔森。

Denzel was known to the family.
丹泽尔是这个家庭认识的人。

Denzel Nelson was my father-in-law when I was married to his son.
丹泽尔·尼尔森是我嫁给他儿子时的公公。

So a man she'd once been very close with, but hadn't seen much of since her divorce.
所以是一个她曾经非常亲近、但离婚后就没怎么见过的男人。

He always had cowboy boots and a cowboy snap down and then a cowboy hat on.
他总是穿着牛仔靴，戴着牛仔纽扣衬衫和牛仔帽。

Was this kind of stocky cowboy figure?
就是那种矮壮的牛仔形象？

He'd worked as a horseshoeer for most of his life, but it's since retired.
他大半辈子都在做蹄铁匠，但已经退休了。

I mean, it was a completely different image, you know, in comparison to my father.
我的意思是，那是一个完全不同的形象，你知道，跟我父亲相比。

I mean, there were, like, opposites.
我的意思是，他们就像是对立面。

He was three times divorced.
他离过三次婚。

And actually, because he had no finances, he asked if there was any chance he could live in the hired man's house next door to my mom.
实际上，因为他没有积蓄，他问有没有可能住在我妈妈隔壁的雇工房里。

And coming off his last divorce, he moved into a little property on the Nurelius farm plot.
在最后一次离婚后，他搬进了诺雷利乌斯农场的一块小地产。

In exchange for helping maintain the yard, like do the mowing, and help out with yard work and things there that he could help with.
作为交换，他帮忙打理院子，比如除草，以及做一些他能帮上忙的院子里的活。

But by all accounts, he and Diane weren't especially close.
但据大家所说，他和黛安并不特别亲近。

Well, she studied with disgusting.
嗯，她对他感到厌恶。

He dressed like a kick, mom used to work here, and she just thought he was kind of repulsive.
他穿着像个混混，妈妈以前在这里工作，她只是觉得他有点令人反感。

She said he smelled bad.
她说他闻起来很臭。

She said he'd stop by for coffee sometimes and she wished that he wouldn't.
她说他有时会顺路来喝咖啡，她希望他别来。

So they certainly weren't close by any means until seemingly out of nowhere, Diane's views on Denzel completely changed.
所以他们当然一点也不亲近，直到似乎毫无来由地，黛安对丹泽尔的看法彻底改变了。

It was a Sunday, I call mom and the woman talking to me was not my mom.
那是一个星期天，我打电话给妈妈，但跟我说话的女人不是我妈妈。

And she was like, I need to tell you something.
她像是说：“我需要告诉你一些事。”

And then she went on to say, I've invited Denzel to share my life and live in my house with me.
然后她接着说：“我邀请了丹泽尔来分享我的生活，和我一起住在我的房子里。”

I'm sure my mouth dropped open because I was like, what is happening?
我肯定嘴巴都张大了，因为我想：发生什么事了？

She goes, I need you to accept him and love him and welcome him into our family because this is what I want.
她继续说：“我需要你接受他、爱他，并欢迎他进入我们的家庭，因为这是我要的。”

Their mother called them up and sort of presented this is a done deal.
她们的母亲打电话给她们，基本上是把这个当作既成事实来宣布。

And I run love, he's moving into the house, he's the love of my life.
而且我已经爱了，他要搬进房子里，他是我一生的挚爱。

It was hard.
这很难。

It was hard to swallow.
这很难接受。

It really was, but.
确实如此，但是。

But Chris and Julie tried to be accepting of this.
但克里斯和朱莉试图接受这一点。

You know, for mom's sake, we all adapted.
你知道，为了妈妈，我们都适应了。

So things were okay for a while and Diane, you know, she seemed happy.
所以有段时间事情还好，黛安，你知道，她看起来很快乐。

She and Denzel started spending their days on on these drives.
她和丹泽尔开始天天开车兜风。

They drive around the state or to different states.
他们在州内或不同州之间开车。

They go to antique shows or horses or quilt shows.
他们去古董展、马展或棉被展。

You know, at age 80, Diane was finding a new way to live.
你知道，在80岁时，黛安找到了新的生活方式。

But Diane's daughter's also noticed changes in her that they found more worrying.
但黛安的女儿们也注意到她身上一些更令人担忧的变化。

My mom always was a fashionista.
我妈妈一直是个时尚达人。

She used to make her own clothing suits.
她过去自己做衣服套装。

My mother had always been very well dressed, very, you know, interested in her appearance.
我妈妈总是穿得很讲究，非常，你知道，注重外表。

But then I came home and she's wearing jeans with a big wide cowboy belt.
但后来我回家，她穿着牛仔裤，系着一条宽大的牛仔腰带。

And it's a little cruddy horse breeders baseball cap.
还戴着一顶有点脏的马繁殖者棒球帽。

All of a sudden she was dressing like a cowboy and no makeup, no makeup.
突然间她穿得像牛仔，不化妆，完全不化妆。

And I was just like, who are you?
我当时就想：你是谁？

And some of the changes were deeper ones.
而且有些改变更深层。

And she said to me one day, you know, I'm trying to be more assertive.
有一天她对我说：“你知道，我在努力变得更果断。”

Denzel's training need to be more assertive.
丹泽尔在训练我，需要更果断。

Chris and Julie really felt like their joyful joyous mother was growing.
克里斯和朱莉真的觉得她们那位快乐的母亲在改变。

Mom was a sour.
妈妈变得尖酸刻薄。

She was being aggressive and mean to people.
她对人们变得咄咄逼人、刻薄。

Even Diane's phone calls with her daughters were changing.
甚至黛安与女儿们的电话也在改变。

They started to be this gradual isolation that mom wasn't calling as much.
电话里开始出现这种逐渐的孤立，妈妈打电话没那么勤了。

I'd call her and oh, she'd be busy.
我打电话给她，哦，她会说在忙。

I'll have her call you back.
我会让她给你回电话。

They're finding it harder to reach their mother.
她们发现联系母亲越来越难。

She's not answering the phone when she does answer the phone.
她不接电话，就算接了电话。

It seems as if Denzel's always beside her, always sort of coaching her almost on what to say.
似乎丹泽尔总是在她身边，总是在指导她该说什么。

But I think it was harder and harder for her to understand our conversations when we would talk.
但我觉得，在我们交谈时，她越来越难理解我们的对话了。

They sort of feel like their mother is deteriorating and ways they can't quite understand from far away.
她们感觉母亲在衰退，而且是在她们从远方无法完全理解的方式。

But it's only in September of 2017 that a doctor finally gives shape to what Diane's daughters sort of both knew and couldn't see.
但直到2017年9月，医生才最终明确了黛安的女儿们隐约知道却看不到的东西。

I couldn't get a hold of mom and was worried about her.
我联系不上妈妈，很担心她。

And I got a phone call from Denzel that said mom was in the hospital.
我接到丹泽尔的电话，说妈妈住院了。

He didn't think it was her heart.
他不认为是心脏问题。

They weren't sure.
他们不确定。

Denzel had taken Diane to the emergency room because she felt short of breath.
丹泽尔带黛安去了急诊室，因为她感觉气短。

And at the hospital she was given a cognitive test.
在医院，她接受了认知测试。

She scored poorly.
她得分很差。

She didn't know the name of the president for instance.
例如，她不知道总统的名字。

I decided, you know what, I'm going back to Iowa and I got a plane ticket.
我决定：“知道吗，我要回爱荷华州。”然后我订了机票。

Chris actually got a plane ticket too, but I got back there before Chris.
克里斯其实也订了机票，但我在克里斯之前到了那里。

So I went to the hospital met with mom.
所以我去医院见了妈妈。

The doctor in groom came in and explained to me that, yeah, you know, your mother, he had diagnosed her with dementia.
医生走进来向我解释说：“是的，你知道，你母亲，”他诊断她患有痴呆症。

And it's here at this time that Diane is diagnosed with dementia.
就在此时，黛安被诊断出患有痴呆症。

That was the day we went to Vicki's house.
那天我们去了维基家。

Vicki was kind of a friend to mom and to us and we were so shocked.
维基是妈妈和我们的朋友，我们当时非常震惊。

We're sitting at her bar crying and she's like, well, of course your mom has dementia.
我们坐在她吧台边哭，她说：“嗯，你妈妈当然有痴呆症。”

I don't know that.
我不知道那个。

We've known that for years.
我们好几年了。

It's around the time that she receives that diagnosis that Diane starts rearranging her affairs.
大约在她收到诊断的那个时候，黛安开始重新安排她的事务。

That's when Denzel was added to the bank accounts.
那时丹泽尔被加到了银行账户里。

She gives Denzel her financial power of attorney.
她把财务授权书给了丹泽尔。

He was a signer.
他是签字人。

He could post sign on mom's checks.
他能在妈妈的支票上背书。

She redrafts her will so that if she dies before Denzel, he is the right to live on her property.
她重写了遗嘱，这样如果她先于丹泽尔去世，他有权住在她的房产上。

Basically, it gives Denzel control of almost everything.
基本上，这给了丹泽尔对几乎所有一切的控制权。

And she also dissolves her financial trust.
她还解散了她的财务信托。

This is the trust that her daughter Julie managed, which holds all of her assets and all of her investments.
这正是她女儿朱莉管理的信托，持有她所有的资产和投资。

And when Julie checks Diane's bank statements, she starts seeing cash withdrawals of hundreds of dollars at a time.
当朱莉查看黛安的银行对账单时，她开始看到每次数百美元的现金取款。

This was especially worrying because they knew that their mother was worth around $4 million.
这尤其令人担忧，因为她们知道母亲身价大约400万美元。

When that Denzel, you know, three times divorced her retired horseshoe or was worth basically nothing.
而那个丹泽尔，你知道，离过三次婚的退休蹄铁匠，基本上一文不值。

Denzel had taken mom's phones away.
丹泽尔拿走了妈妈的手机。

We couldn't talk to her in the phone.
我们不能在电话里和她说话了。

We didn't know if she was dead or alive.
我们不知道她是死是活。

He wouldn't respond to us anymore.
他不再回复我们了。

We were scared.
我们很害怕。

All of this just leads Chris and Julie to the conclusion that they need to get to the bottom of what's been happening.
这一切让克里斯和朱莉得出结论，她们需要查清正在发生的事情的真相。

It's just sitting in the chair in my living room and it's like something swept over me and said you need to go to Iowa right now.
我就坐在客厅的椅子里，然后就像有什么东西席卷了我，说：“你现在需要去爱荷华州。”

So what do they decide to do?
那么她们决定怎么做？

Their first step is to call a lawyer and the lawyer recommended that they obtain what's called a temporary protective order.
她们的第一步是打电话给律师，律师建议她们申请一项所谓的临时保护令。

Basically an emergency restraining order that would force Denzel to move out of the house and stay away from Diane.
基本上是一道紧急限制令，迫使丹泽尔从房子里搬出去，远离黛安。

And the sisters hoped really give them a chance to sit down with their mother away from Denzel's influence and really get to the bottom of what was happening.
姐妹俩希望这真的能给她们一个机会，在远离丹泽尔影响的情况下与母亲坐下来，真正查清正在发生的事情。

And that's what the restraining order would in theory do.
而这正是限制令理论上能做到的。

Right.
对。

It wouldn't get Denzel arrested, but it would get him out of the house.
它不会让丹泽尔被捕，但会让他离开房子。

That's right.
没错。

So as a lawyer sort of working away on this paperwork, Chris and Julie get in a flight home to Iowa.
所以当律师在处理这些文件时，克里斯和朱莉乘飞机回到了爱荷华州。

It was I think on a Thursday that we flew into Omaha.
我想我们是在一个周四飞抵奥马哈的。

It's October 2017.
那是2017年10月。

They drive up to the old farmhouse.
她们开车来到那座老农舍。

Our level of fear driving up that driveway was unreal because we didn't know how Denzel was going to react.
我们开车上那条车道的恐惧程度简直不真实，因为我们不知道丹泽尔会作何反应。

We didn't know how soon the police were going to be there walking up to that door was the most frightening moment of my life.
我们不知道警察多久会到。走上那扇门是我一生中最可怕的时刻。

And as I door, they described your mother answering and her initial response to them being there as to hesitate.
当他们敲门时，她们描述了母亲来开门，而她最初对她们在场的反应是犹豫。

She just stood there and said, Mom, can we come in?
她只是站在那里，然后说：“妈妈，我们能进来吗？”

And she goes, oh, yeah, you know, like she was startled.
然后她说：“哦，是啊，你知道，”像是吃了一惊。

Like, of course, you can come in when the daughters walk into the house.
像是在说：“当然，你们可以进来。”当女儿们走进房子时。

They are shocked by what they see this farmhouse, which was once scrupulously tidy.
她们被所见景象震惊了——这座曾经一丝不苟整洁的农舍。

This looks uncamped.
看起来无人打理。

In the kitchen, the landline phone is missing and the shelves are basically bare.
厨房里，座机电话不见了，架子上基本空空如也。

The only food that Diane seems to have in the house is a freezer full of ice cream cones.
黛安房子里似乎仅有的食物就是一个装满冰淇淋蛋筒的冰柜。

On the stove, there's this piece of masking tape with Denzel's handwriting on it.
炉子上有一块遮蔽胶带，上面有丹泽尔的笔迹。

It says, do not use in big letters.
上面用大写字母写着“请勿使用”。

On the door frame, there's this piece of wood that's just blocking access to the staircase.
门框上有一块木头，正好挡住了通往楼梯的通道。

When we go in, we find our mom and keep the bowl of doing anything or understanding why we're there or anything.
当我们进去后，我们发现妈妈什么也不做，也不理解我们为什么在那里或任何事。

And their mother just seems completely out of it.
而她们的母亲似乎完全不在状态。

Her curly white hair, which is usually perfectly styled and puffed is flat around her neck as if it hasn't been washed.
她卷曲的白发，通常打理得很完美、蓬松，现在却平贴在脖子上，好像没洗过。

Her watch is on upside down.
她的手表戴反了。

Her words come out slurred, eventually Diane kind of gives up and goes into the bedroom and just lies face down on her bed.
她说话含糊不清，最后黛安索性放弃了，走进卧室，直接脸朝下趴在床上。

So, Chris and I just tried to make conversation hoping in praying that the police would come driving up the driveway.
所以，我和克里斯只是试图找话说，希望并祈祷警察会开车驶入车道。

And as expected, the daughters, two sheriff's deputies pull up.
正如预期，女儿们看到两名警长副手停下车。

And I looked at Chris like, oh, you know, because I didn't know how he was going to react.
我看着克里斯，像是在说：“哦，你知道，”因为我不知道他会如何反应。

I was terror.
我吓坏了。

The deputies explained that under the terms of the order, Denzel would be immediately removed from Diane's home and, quote, we're strained from committing further acts of abuse or threats of elder abuse charges that Denzel immediately denied.
副手们解释说，根据命令条款，丹泽尔将被立即从黛安的家中带走，并且“我们被禁止进一步实施虐待行为或威胁虐待老人”，丹泽尔立即否认了这些指控。

Chris went straight back to the bedroom so that she could be with mom because I said, I don't want mom to be upset or to wake up to any of what's going on.
克里斯直接回到卧室，这样就可以和妈妈在一起，因为我说：“我不想让妈妈难过，或者醒来时看到正在发生的事情。”

So, in this sister's telling Denzel runs into Diane's bedroom where she's sleeping.
所以，据姐妹俩讲述，丹泽尔冲进黛安睡觉的卧室。

And he's screaming at my mom, Diane, Diane, do you know what those girls have done?
他对我妈妈尖叫：“黛安，黛安，你知道那些女孩做了什么吗？”

Do you know what they're doing to me?
你知道她们在对我做什么吗？

Start screaming at the top of his lungs.
开始声嘶力竭地尖叫。

It was utter chaos.
那简直是彻底的混乱。

And then his sort of force to leave them.
然后他被迫离开她们。

The look on his face when he walked up that door was, I wish you were dead.
他走上那扇门时脸上的表情是：“我希望你死。”

He was furious.
他愤怒至极。

I don't think Chris and Julie really had plans for what would come next.
我不认为克里斯和朱莉对接下来会发生什么有真正的计划。

And I think what surprised the most on that initial day was that none of the seem to register for Diane at all.
而我认为最初那天最令人惊讶的是，这一切似乎都没有在黛安那里留下任何印象。

You know, when the police left, she fell asleep.
你知道，警察离开后，她就睡着了。

The first thing she said when she woke up from her nap despite having witnessed, you know, this whole scene before her was, where's Denzel?
她午睡醒来说的第一句话，尽管目睹了刚才发生的一切，却是：“丹泽尔在哪？”

She asked it again and she asked it again and all evening and in the middle of the night in the next day too.
她问了一遍又一遍，整个晚上、半夜，还有第二天都在问。

She didn't even know where he had gone.
她甚至不知道他去哪了。

And I think the daughters, you know, they tried to explain to their mother what was happening.
我想女儿们，你知道，她们试图向母亲解释正在发生的事情。

Can I ask a question?
我能问个问题吗？

Yeah, but you don't necessarily get an answer.
能，但你不一定得到回答。

Well, later I listened to this long conversation that Chris recorded on her phone.
嗯，后来我听了一段克里斯用手机录制的长篇对话。

Did you terminate my general power of attorney?
你终止了我的普通授权书吗？

And you can hear Chris and Julie, you know, ask questions of their mother.
你可以听到克里斯和朱莉在向母亲提问。

You mean general power of attorney?
你是指普通授权书吗？

I had it.
我有过。

I know I terminated my trust, but did you also terminate my power of attorney?
我知道我终止了我的信托，但你也终止了我的授权书吗？

What is the problem with the nap tonight?
今晚小睡有什么问题？

I don't know.
我不知道。

Okay.
好的。

Hi.
嗨。

And Diane's responses are really shocking.
而黛安的回答真的很令人震惊。

She says, you know, what's the power of attorney?
她说：“你知道，什么是授权书？”

Mm-hmm.
嗯哼。

And there are changes.
而且有一些变化。

She doesn't remember making.
她不记得自己做过这些改变。

You know, I could grasp nothing about the trust.
你知道，我对信托一无所知。

Oh, my gosh.
哦，天哪。

It was there.
它曾经存在。

And you know, you rolled it up.
而且你知道，你把它收起来了。

And that's.
那就是。

I've never told anything from your 12.
我从未从你的12岁那里听说过任何事。

She's using it.
她在用它。

But, well, Diane clearly doesn't understand, you know, the precise financial and legal decisions that she made.
但是，好吧，黛安显然不理解她所做的那些精确的财务和法律决定。

Her motivation is very clear.
她的动机非常明确。

Um, a long time ago when after that died, we did this.
嗯，很久以前，在那之后去世时，我们做了这个。

You asked me.
你问过我。

You said mom, you know, when you want to take care of her trust.
你说：“妈妈，你知道，当你想要处理她的信托时。”

I looked at you and I said, honey, I don't know if I know the first thing about that sort of thing.
我看着你，我说：“亲爱的，我不知道我对那种事是不是一窍不通。”

Um, do you want to go there?
嗯，你想去那里吗？

You said you'd be happy too.
你说你也很乐意。

And I said, okay.
我说：“好的。”

I have. Inter?
我有。 中间？

So, um, I can remember saying that.
所以，嗯，我记得说过那些话。

But now, I've got the feeling.
但现在，我有这种感觉。

And it has nothing to do with them, so.
而且这跟他们无关，所以。

Uh, he's got his own money.
呃，他有自己的钱。

I've got my own money.
我有我自己的钱。

Uh, I want to be able to be my own person before I die.
呃，我想在死之前能做我自己。

She tells her daughters.
她告诉女儿们。

I want to make my own decisions.
我想要自己做决定。

I want to be in charge of myself until I die.
我想在自己死之前掌握自己。

I knew that I had given you control of, of that for me, because back before.
我知道我曾经把控制权交给你，因为我之前。

Because I didn't have a clue in my mind.
因为我的脑子里毫无头绪。

I wasn't working very well.
我当时状态不太好。

Anyway, um, probably better than anything.
不管怎样，嗯，可能比什么都好。

But, uh, I want to be.
但是，呃，我想要。

I'm pushing.
我在推进。

I'm realizing Katie in this moment that I don't really understand what the law.
凯蒂，我此刻意识到我并不真正理解法律。

Has to say about this complicated situation.
对于这个复杂情况有什么规定。

I mean, here, Diane is asking to see Denzel, who has just been removed from the house per that protective order.
我的意思是，这里，黛安要求见丹泽尔，而丹泽尔刚根据保护令被从房子里带走。

And Diane is taking actions like giving him power of attorney.
而黛安正在采取行动，比如给他授权书。

But she's been given a diagnosis of dementia.
但她已经被诊断出痴呆症。

And that recording you heard, so just she didn't even understand what power of attorney is at this moment.
而且你听到的那段录音显示，她此刻甚至不理解什么是授权书。

Both of which runs contrary to the idea that she's.
这两点都与她能够掌控自己生活和这类决定的观念相悖。

Really capable of being in control of her life and these kinds of decisions.
真正有能力掌控自己的生活和这类决定。

So what does the law say about that?
那么法律对此怎么说？

Yeah, this definitely confused Diane's daughter.
是的，这肯定让黛安的女儿们感到困惑。

And it confuses a lot of adult children of people with dementia.
这也困惑了许多痴呆症患者的成年子女。

Adult children often assume that, you know, the moment a doctor pronounces a person to have dementia.
成年子女常常认为，医生宣布一个人患有痴呆症的那一刻。

That kind of flips a decisional switch.
就像扳动了一个决策开关。

And all of a sudden, that person is now legally and medically.
然后突然之间，那个人在法律上和医学上。

Incapable of choosing for herself anymore.
再也无法为自己做选择了。

The reality is that there's no such switch within modern medicine.
现实是，现代医学中并没有这样的开关。

Patients are never declared completely competent or incompetent in some holistic sense.
患者从未被从整体意义上宣布为完全有能力或完全无能力。

Instead, doctors are asked to look at individual choices and whether or not a person is able to make a specific choice in a specific moment.
相反，医生被要求审视个别选择，以及一个人是否能在特定时刻做出特定选择。

And this in practice can mean that a person with dementia can retain the ability to make choices for many years and then lose the ability and stages.
这在实践中可能意味着，一名痴呆症患者可以在很多年内保留做出选择的能力，然后逐渐失去能力。

So lose the ability to make complex choices first and then simple once later.
所以先失去做出复杂选择的能力，然后才失去简单选择的能力。

And this is important from a legal perspective too, because it means that people with dementia retain the ability to make legal choices, even when they are cognitively impaired.
从法律角度来看，这也非常重要，因为它意味着痴呆症患者即使在认知受损时，仍保留做出法律选择的能力。

But of course, this often creates conflicts within families because there's no clear cut medical way to determine without error that a person is capable of making a specific choice.
但这当然常常在家庭内部造成冲突，因为没有明确无误的医疗方法来确定一个人有能力做出特定选择。

So based on what you said, the daughter's options would seem to be pretty limited here.
所以根据你所说的，女儿们在这里的选择似乎相当有限。

So what is their next move?
那么她们下一步是什么？

It's clear to Chris and Julie that their mother had been very effective at hiding the extent of her impairment from them.
对克里斯和朱莉来说很明确的是，她们的母亲一直非常有效地向她们隐瞒了自身受损的程度。

At this point, Diana is still speaking well and she can be engaged in conversation.
此时，黛安娜仍然能说会道，可以参与对话。

So her daughter's decided that it's probably going to be important for them to get some evidence that their mother is actually very sick.
所以女儿们决定，取得一些证据证明母亲实际上病得很重，这很可能很重要。

And their decision is to bring her to the University of Iowa hospitals in clinic where they know there's a dedicated geriatric psychiatrist unit where their mother can get a more formal assessment.
她们决定带她去爱荷华大学医院诊所，那里有一个专门的精神科老年病区，母亲可以接受更正式的评估。

And so we sat mom done and explained it to her as best we could without having a sound scary, like we're taking you to a hospital.
于是我们让妈妈坐下，尽可能好地向她解释，不让她听起来可怕，比如“我们要带你去医院”。

And they're telling Diana agrees to go, she helps to pack her bag, she gets into the car.
然后她们说，黛安娜同意去，她帮忙收拾行李，上了车。

And they all started on this hours long drive to the hospital.
然后她们开始了长达数小时的去医院车程。

Everything stayed quiet in the car for quite a while.
车里安静了好一阵子。

We got to Des Moines and my phone rang and it was our attorney's mother who's a nurse.
我们到了得梅因，我的手机响了，是我们律师的母亲，她是一名护士。

It's some time around sunset.
大约是日落时分。

And mom said, who is that?
妈妈问：“那是谁？”

I said, I mean, what could I talk to her?
我说：“我是说，我能跟她说什么？”

Of course.
当然。

That Diana starts getting upset.
之后黛安娜开始变得不安。

So she gets the phone, I mean, I'm being kidnapped.
所以她抢过电话说：“我被绑架了。”

Please call the police, come and get me, I'm being kidnapped and I lean.
请报警，来接我，我被绑架了。”我弯下腰。

At some point, she throws a book at Julie.
在某个时刻，她把一本书扔向朱莉。

She starts hitting Chris and I had to grab her wrist to keep her from continuing to hit me.
她开始打克里斯，我不得不抓住她的手腕阻止她继续打我。

She's screaming that she doesn't know where she is and is being, you know, driven somewhere against her will.
她尖叫着说她不知道自己在哪里，而且被违背意愿地开车带到某处。

Yes, it was terrifying.
是的，那太可怕了。

Physically, it's the voice, it's the body, it's everything that nurtured you before.
身体上，那是声音，是身体，是以前养育你的一切。

And suddenly, it's like she's possessed.
而突然之间，她就像被附身了一样。

After a few minutes of this, the sisters decide they're going to call an ambulance and have an ambulance drive Diane the rest of the way to the hospital.
这样过了几分钟，姐妹俩决定叫救护车，让救护车把黛安送完剩下的路去医院。

When they get there, Diane's given a cognitive assessment.
到达医院后，黛安接受了认知评估。

And what's shocking is that, you know, while Diane has been operating more or less normally in her life, she actually has very significant deficits.
而令人震惊的是，虽然黛安在生活中或多或少能正常运作，但实际上她有非常显著的缺陷。

The neuropsychologist who tests her describes deficits in almost every field that he tests for and decides that Diane is unable to safely perform tasks as complex as preparing a meal.
为她做测试的神经心理学家描述说，她几乎在测试的每个领域都存在缺陷，并判定黛安无法安全地执行像准备餐食这样复杂的任务。

In his final report, he describes Diane as having significantly limited capacity for informed personal, medical and financial decision making.
在他的最终报告中，他将黛安描述为在知情个人、医疗和财务决策方面的能力受到显著限制。

Later, a doctor helps to kind of interpret these findings and she uses the phrase Alzheimer's disease for the first time in her view.
后来，一位医生帮助解释了这些发现，她第一次明确使用了“阿尔茨海默病”这个说法。

Diane is already at a late moderate stage.
黛安已经到了中晚期阶段。

So far beyond the kind of mild forgetfulness that it started to worry her daughters.
远远超出了那种让女儿们开始担心的轻微健忘。

So the kids wanted to know how bad things had gotten for their mom.
所以孩子们想知道母亲的情况有多糟。

And now they know, I mean, they have a very serious diagnosis now.
现在她们知道了，我的意思是，她们现在有了非常严重的诊断。

Right, and that really convinces them that they need to take control of the situation in a more formal way.
对，这确实让她们相信需要以更正式的方式控制局面。

So talking to their lawyer, Chris and Julie decide that they're going to focus on getting legal guardianship of their mother, which will effectively give them control over many of her personal and medical choices.
所以和律师商量后，克里斯和朱莉决定专注于获得母亲的法定监护人身份，这将有效地让她们控制她的许多个人和医疗选择。

And they're convinced that, you know, this will be a fairly straightforward case and that once they get guardianship, they'll be able to kind of fix everything.
她们相信，这会是一个相当简单的案例，一旦获得监护权，她们就能解决一切。

But it's also at this point that their personal relationship with their mother really evaporates.
但也正是在这个时候，她们与母亲的个人关系真正消失了。

Diane is moved from the hospital to an assisted living facility in Denison.
黛安被从医院转移到丹尼森的一家辅助生活机构。

And because the elder abuse charges again, Stenzel had been dropped, she's able to start seeing him again.
而且因为虐待老人的指控又被撤销了，她能够再次见他。

And once that happens, Diane quickly makes the choice to stop seeing her children.
一旦发生这种情况，黛安很快选择了不再见她的孩子们。

She tells pretty much everyone she knows, everyone she sees that she wants nothing to do with them, that she doesn't want them to visit.
她告诉几乎所有她认识的人、她见到的每个人，说她想和他们断绝关系，她不想让他们来探望。

At one point, she even tells a friend, she doesn't have daughters anymore.
有一次，她甚至告诉一个朋友，她没有女儿了。

Hello.
你好。

Hey, dental.
嘿，丹泽。

Hey.
嘿。

There's this recording of a phone call.
有一段电话录音。

I'm not sure where to start.
我不确定从哪里开始。

So I'll tell you what I've planned on saying, and that is that I would be happy to sit down and talk with you and Nana.
所以我会告诉你我打算说的话，那就是我很乐意坐下来和你还有奶奶谈谈。

Well, I don't know.
嗯，我不知道。

I'll have to get back to you.
我得再回复你。

Please let me tell my grandmother the same thing.
请让我也告诉我祖母同样的话。

How would you tell her?
你怎么告诉她？

Julie's daughter Hayley calls her grandmother Diane and tries to mediate the situation.
朱莉的女儿海莉打电话给她的祖母黛安，试图调解局面。

You know, I know.
你知道，我知道。

Hi.
嗨。

Over the course of the call, you really hear Hayley try to make the case that I love all of my family.
在整个通话过程中，你真的能听到海莉在争取：“我爱我所有的家人。”

I love you both.
我爱你们俩。

I love my mother and aunt.
我爱我的母亲和姨妈。

You know, this has just got out of control, Chris and Julie.
你知道，这已经失控了，克里斯和朱莉。

I love their mother.
我爱她们的妈妈。

I need you both to know, and I need especially dental to know that from my perspective, there are opportunities for everybody to come together.
我需要你们俩都知道，我尤其需要丹泽尔知道，从我的角度来看，大家是有机会团聚的。

And everybody to be happy, especially Nana.
大家都会开心，尤其是奶奶。

There's got to be some way to resolve this.
一定有办法解决这个问题的。

It's up to Nana, whether she accepts them again.
这取决于奶奶，看她是否再次接受她们。

Not family.
不是家人。

It's up to Nana.
取决于奶奶。

And she has chosen to sing and choose to write more to Hayley.
而她选择了唱歌，选择给海莉写更多。

And Diane, for her part, she speaks very loosely.
而黛安这边，她说话非常随意。

I need you way out of this, and there is no.
我需要你远离这件事，而且没有。

I can't handle much more.
我受不了更多了。

But in the early way, I can get rid of that stress.
但如果早点这样，我就能摆脱那种压力。

It's a bit of constant stress.
这是一种持续的压力。

She says quite clearly.
她说得非常清楚。

There's not a way to move on.
没有前进的办法。

I'm just saying my life is the only thing I can do is break into the night after the sex.
我只是说我的生命，我唯一能做的就是做完爱后闯入黑夜。

I'm sorry.
对不起。

Don't be angry.
别生气。

I'm watching her and I love to go to my parents.
我在看着她，我喜欢去见我的父母。

Well, do you want to go back?
嗯，你想回去吗？

Hi, Mr. Nelson.
嗨，尼尔森先生。

Thanks so much for getting back to me again.
非常感谢你再次回复我。

Can you hear me, okay?
你能听清吗？

Yes.
能。

Okay, great.
好的，很好。

And thanks for this.
谢谢这个。

So Katie, you were eventually spoke with Denzel about how he saw his relationship with Diane and with her family.
那么凯蒂，你最终和丹泽尔谈过他是如何看待他与黛安及其家人的关系的。

So in his mind, how did all of this play out?
那么在他的脑海里，这一切是如何发展的？

So that's also describes falling in love is sort of set in and unexpected.
所以他也描述了坠入爱河是一种意外的发生。

Well, one day I decided I just going to go for a match.
嗯，有一天我决定出去兜风。

And Diane was out working at the art.
黛安在外面做园艺。

She says, what are you up to?
她问：“你在做什么？”

And I said, you know, it's a nice day.
我说：“你知道，今天天气不错。”

I'm going to get in the truck and just go for a garage.
我要上车随便开一圈。”

When I first got in touch with him on the phone, he told me this.
当我第一次在电话里联系他时，他告诉我这些。

Long story about falling in love with Diane and his truck.
一个关于爱上黛安和他的卡车的长篇故事。

I said, you want to come along?
我说：“你想一起来吗？”

And she said, well, where are you going?
她问：“嗯，你要去哪？”

I said, I don't know.
我说：“我不知道。”

She said, well, yeah.
她说：“嗯，好啊。”

And that day they took their first drive.
那天他们进行了第一次驾驶。

Soon one drive became regular drives and a longer drive.
很快一次驾驶变成了常规驾驶，然后是更远的驾驶。

They took trips to horseshoes and quilt shows and antique sales all around the state.
他们去了全州各地的蹄铁匠、棉被展和古董销售。

One of the first trips we made.
我们最早的一次旅行之一。

And I took a name because her husband was in the journey.
我取了个名字，因为她的丈夫在其中。

And every trip they ever went on, they had to be certain set your place because they had them all down.
他们每次旅行，都必须确定某个地方，因为他们记录了一切。

You know, these trips were themselves kind of an entirely new experience for Diane.
你知道，这些旅行本身对黛安来说就是一种全新的体验。

And the first trip we went on when we just dug off.
我们第一次去的时候，只是随便开。

She says, where are we staying?
她问：“我们住哪？”

And I said, well, or you want to stay?
我说：“嗯，你想住哪？”

Diane, he said, was amazed to learn that Denzel never booked a motel room in advance.
黛安，他说，惊讶地发现丹泽尔从不提前预订汽车旅馆房间。

He just got in his car and drove and drove until he felt like stopping.
他只是上车，开啊开，直到他想停下来。

And then he'd stay at whatever motel happened to have space.
然后他会住进任何恰好有房间的汽车旅馆。

So she liked how it was kind of more spontaneous traveling with you.
所以她喜欢和你一起旅行时那种更随性的感觉。

And he used to deal with something that just really tickled.
这让他感到很开心。

And Denzel says that on those longer trips, they would sometimes stay overnight at a motel.
丹泽尔说，在较长的旅行中，他们有时会在汽车旅馆过夜。

In the beginning, of course, they're just friends.
一开始，当然，他们只是朋友。

So they would sleep in two separate beds.
所以他们会睡在两间不同的床上。

He talked about leaving the room to go outside.
他提到会离开房间到外面去。

Well, she got dressed and he'd do the same for her.
嗯，她穿衣服时他会回避，反之亦然。

But then one night, as he told it, Diane just climbed out of her bed and into his arms.
但后来有一天晚上，据他讲述，黛安只是从她的床上爬下来，投入他的怀抱。

He thought at that moment about how she was the gentlest person he'd ever met.
他那一刻觉得，她是他见过的最温柔的人。

Finally one day.
最后有一天。

Well, anyway, we ended up in the big house.
嗯，不管怎样，我们最后搬进了大房子。

And I was invited.
我受到了邀请。

And so this relationship just blossomed.
所以这段关系就这样开花结果了。

We had some really, a couple, three, really good years there.
我们真的在那里度过了几年好时光。

Oh, 2013 until the salt made the fan.
哦，从2013年直到事情闹大。

When Denzel moved in, you know, he knew that Diane's daughter is weren't really accepting of the relationship.
当丹泽尔搬进来时，他知道黛安的女儿们并不真的接受这段关系。

First, never did like the idea that I was living in her dad's house.
首先，她从来就不喜欢我住在她爸的房子里。

But he also didn't really care.
但他也并不真的在意。

You know, it wasn't her dad's house anymore.
你知道，那已经不是她爸的房子了。

It was her mother's house.
那是她妈的房子。

I think Denzel felt like, you know, Diane was a grown woman.
我想丹泽尔觉得黛安是成年女性。

And she was entitled to make her own decisions.
她有权自己做决定。

And it didn't really bother him.
这并不真的困扰他。

A couple of daughters who lived out of state approved of him or not.
两个住在州外的女儿是否认可他，他不在意。

But later, I think Denzel started to butt heads more with Chris and Julie.
但后来，我想丹泽尔开始更多地与克里斯和朱莉发生冲突。

It seemed to him that Diane's daughters were interested in controlling things for their mother.
在他看来，黛安的女儿们似乎热衷于替母亲控制局面。

You know, he was surprised to learn that even Diane's social security check went straight into an account that was managed by Julie.
他惊讶地得知，甚至黛安的社会保障金支票也直接存入了由朱莉管理的账户。

And he described being sort of disturbed to learn that whenever Diane wanted to do anything major, like, create in her car for when she liked better.
他形容自己不安地发现，每当黛安想做任何重要事情，比如换一辆她更喜欢的车时。

She had to go through Julie who was the trustee of her trust.
她都必须通过朱莉，而朱莉是她信托的受托人。

Did it bother her that Julie was kind of in charge of things or did she like it because it was easier?
她有没有因为朱莉掌管一切而感到烦恼，还是因为她觉得这样更容易而喜欢？

No, she hated it.
不，她讨厌这样。

Yeah.
是的。

She was perfectly able to take care of her own bills and everything.
她完全有能力处理自己的账单和一切。

I'm curious what Denzel's interpretation and recollection is of the day that Diane's daughters show up with that order, forcing him to leave the house.
我很好奇丹泽尔对黛安的女儿们带着那份命令出现、迫使他离开房子的那天，他的解读和回忆是什么。

I think he was completely amazed by it.
我想他对此感到完全震惊。

I was a woman and I saw Chris and Julie come up to the door.
我当时是个女人（指代错误，应是“我”，但原文如此），我看到克里斯和朱莉走到门口。

And I told Diane, I says, there's going to be trouble.
我告诉黛安说：“要出事了。”

He didn't see it coming at all.
他完全没有预料到。

And then the sheriff showed up and they had a restraining order and they hauled me out of the house.
然后警长出现了，他们有一份限制令，然后把我拖出了房子。

And I heard Chris tell Diane, Denzel did something illegal and you're never going to see it.
我听到克里斯告诉黛安：“丹泽尔做了违法的事，你再也不能见他了。”

In Denzel's version of events, he doesn't resist at all.
在丹泽尔对事件的描述中，他根本没有反抗。

He goes into Diane's bedroom to say goodbye to her.
他走进黛安的卧室向她道别。

I told Diane, I said, he tough on me.
我告诉黛安说：“他对我说不客气。”

He gathers his various medications and gets into his car and drives away.
他收拾好他的各种药物，上了车，开走了。

And I think Denzel was completely taken aback when he heard the specific charges that he was accused of.
我想丹泽尔在听到他被指控的具体罪名时完全惊呆了。

A charge to us, elderly abuse, just one lie around after another.
对我们的指控，虐待老人，一个接一个的谎言。

Certainly the phrase elder abuse struck him as being entirely inappropriate.
“虐待老人”这个说法在他看来当然完全不恰当。

Denzel ended up giving me a copy of his diary from that time.
丹泽尔最后给了我一本他当时的日记副本。

And he called them the sin sisters kind of coming in and making up stories about him hurting this person who he loved more than anyone else.
他把她们称为“罪恶姐妹”，闯进来编造故事，说他伤害了这个他比任何人都爱的人。

They said, I want to see him right or we weren't even right.
她们说：“我现在要见他，否则我们也不会是对的。”

Yeah, that's what that's the lies they told.
是的，这就是她们撒的谎。

And he had his own explanation for things.
他对事情有自己的解释。

At the time, we went out to eat because we could.
当时，我们出去吃饭，因为我们能去。

And I and it took our lives as for the cupboards being there.
而且我把这当成生活的一部分，至于那些空柜子。

Well, Denzel said the cupboards were there because he knew that Diane had spent 50 years of life cooking for other people.
嗯，丹泽尔说柜子空着是因为他知道黛安已经花了50年为别人做饭。

And he thought it would be nice for her to be taken care of.
他觉得有人照顾她会很好。

They said there was some mold in there and there was no mold.
他们说那里有霉斑，但并没有霉斑。

And he said for the house being dirty again, he said it looked okay to him.
至于说房子脏，他说他觉得看起来还好。

But anyway, he didn't like to see Diane on our hands and knees scrubbing the floor.
但不管怎样，他不喜欢看到黛安趴在地上擦地板。

And anytime he did, he told her to get up and not worry about it.
每当他看到，他就会告诉她起来，别担心。

He would take care of things.
他会处理这些事。

So Denzel, you know, he left the house as he was forced to do.
所以丹泽尔，他按照被迫的那样离开了房子。

But I think from that moment, he had every intention to fight Diane's daughters for what he saw as Diane's.
但我认为从那一刻起，他就一心要为了他眼中的黛安的自由和解放而与黛安的女儿们斗争。

Freedom and liberation.
自由和解放。

What about the decline of her memory?
那她记忆力的衰退呢？

Which, of course, is that the heart of all the legal maneuvers that his daughters are undertaking?
当然，这正是女儿们进行所有法律行动的核心所在。

What does he say about that?
他对此怎么说？

He really denies that at this time, Diane was sick.
他真的否认那个时候黛安病了。

No, he was not having any memory issues.
不，他没有记忆力问题。

So the student, in your opinion, she didn't really have dementia right when this all started.
所以，在你看来，她在一开始并没有真正患上痴呆症。

She got it later.
她是后来才得的。

No, no.
不，不。

Sure, he noticed Diane was a little less steady on her feet.
当然，他注意到黛安脚步有点不稳。

You know, maybe her memory wasn't what it was at the age of 30 or 40.
你知道，也许她的记忆不如三十、四十岁的时候了。

But he didn't see it as being some big, serious thing.
但他不认为那是什么严重的大事。

A lot of people have a bit of dementia.
很多人都有点痴呆。

And I think his view was that Diane was more or less unchanged and certainly not changed to the point where she needed someone to be caring for her all of the time.
我想他的看法是，黛安基本没有变化，当然也没有变化到需要别人一直照顾她的程度。

He was prepared to care for her in whatever way he said she needed.
他准备以他所说的她需要的任何方式照顾她。

So what does Denzel do after he and Diane are forcefully separated?
那么丹泽尔在他和黛安被强行分开后做了什么？

So the first thing he does is leave the house is he's ordered to do.
所以他做的第一件事就是按照命令离开房子。

He moves in with his son.
他搬去和儿子同住。

I thought it went nuts.
我以为他疯了。

I mean, can connect with her, can call her or not.
我是说，能联系她，能打电话或者不。

But once Diane's transferred to the assisted living facility, he's given visitation rights again.
但一旦黛安被转到辅助生活机构，他又获得了探视权。

And he serves visiting her every day.
于是他每天去看她。

Most morning, I'm an early rise.
大多数早上，我起得很早。

I always have been.
我一直如此。

I wake up at 4 o'clock.
我4点醒来。

I don't hear what time it would have been.
我不知道那时候是几点。

And so I've been around until 7 when I get to go out there and go to breakfast with her.
所以我在那里待到7点，那时我可以出去和她一起吃早餐。

He shows up at 7 a.m.
他早上7点出现。

He says he's 12 hours.
他说他有12个小时。

He goes for a little walks for her around the building.
他带她在楼周围散散步。

He calculates that if they walk around the building 10 times, it's a mile, not walk a twice.
他计算过，如果绕楼走10圈就是一英里，他们走了两圈。

He sits with her while she naps.
他坐在她旁边，看着她打盹。

We played a lot of cards and watched TV.
我们打了很多牌，看了电视。

Set out in the board swimming.
还在棋盘上玩。

And he says the often times in the night, he would get a call from the assisted living facility.
他说经常在夜里，他会接到辅助生活机构的电话。

And another so tell him that Diane was crying.
有人告诉他黛安在哭。

Crying 2 a.m. 3.m. that she was crying and she wouldn't stop and they'd ask if he could come.
凌晨2点、3点，她在哭，哭个不停，他们问他能不能来。

But many nights it felt me that Diana was feeling a bad time.
但在很多个夜晚，我觉得黛安娜心情不好。

What was she was it just because she was sick or she was lonely, do you think?
她是为什么？只是因为生病，还是因为孤独，你觉得？

She just was what her daughter spent to her.
她只是在想她女儿对她做了什么。

And that maybe they tried to call that day or something that she wouldn't talk to them and then she'd be thinking about it.
也许那天她们试图打电话或什么，她不想和她们说话，然后她就会一直想。

Yeah.
是的。

How would you settle her down?
你怎么让她平静下来？

Hug her.
拥抱她。

Yes, sure.
是的，当然。

Tell her everything was going to be alright.
告诉她一切都会好起来的。

And as Denzel tells it, you know, Diana's very clear throughout this whole time that she loves him.
而据丹泽尔说，这段时间黛安娜一直非常清楚，她爱他。

That she wants to be with him and that more than that she doesn't want to see her daughter anymore.
她想和他在一起，而且不仅如此，她不想再见她的女儿了。

And Denzel sees it for himself.
丹泽尔亲眼看到了这一点。

He says, you know, when Chris and Julie call, Diane's asked if she wants to take the call, she always says no.
他说，当克里斯和朱莉打电话时，黛安被问是否想接，她总是说不。

It's Christmas approaches, Diane, since word to where daughter's through her lawyer is that she doesn't want to see them at all.
圣诞节临近，黛安通过她的律师传话给女儿们，说她完全不想见她们。

And I think Denzel really feels heading into the guardianship case that he's a really good chance of winning because isn't it obvious?
我想丹泽尔在进入监护权案时真的觉得自己赢面很大，因为这不是明摆着的吗？

Diane is telling everyone that she wants Denzel and shouldn't it be her choice?
黛安告诉所有人她想要丹泽尔，难道不应该是她的选择吗？

Well, eventually a court had to make that decision.
嗯，最终法庭必须做出裁决。

Tell us what happened during this trial over guardianship for Diane.
告诉我们这场关于黛安监护权的审判发生了什么。

Well, in a way, this kind of routine trial in this small town in Iowa became this larger philosophical debate over which version of Diane should be listened to.
嗯，在某种程度上，这场发生在爱荷华州小镇的常规审判变成了一场更大的哲学辩论：该听从哪个版本的黛安。

No, Chris and Julie made the point that their mother had for years told them if she ever got dementia, they should be the ones to take care of her.
不，克里斯和朱莉指出，她们的母亲多年来一直告诉她们，如果她得了痴呆症，她们应该是照顾她的人。

She trusted them to make the right decision for her.
她信任她们为她做正确的决定。

Denzel, on the other hand, argued that none of that really mattered because the version of Diane who was sitting in front of them all was saying something very different.
而丹泽尔则辩称，那些都不重要，因为坐在他们面前的黛安版本说的是截然不同的话。

She was saying she wanted him.
她说她想要他。

So in the end, it was a question of what does Diane really want?
所以最终，这是一个黛安真正想要什么的问题。

Is it what she's saying she wants there in the moment in court?
是她在法庭上此刻说的话吗？

Or is it what she said consistently for all the years before her mind became impaired?
还是她在心智受损之前多年来一直所说的？

And ultimately what does the judge decide?
最终法官如何裁决？

In the end, neither of those two sides wins.
最终，双方都没有赢。

The judge decides that Chris and Julie won't be suitable guardians in part because they live out of state, but also because they don't seem to be taking their mothers wishes into consideration when making decisions for her.
法官认为克里斯和朱莉不适合做监护人，部分原因是她们住在州外，也因为她们在为她做决定时似乎没有考虑母亲的意愿。

On the other hand, the judge thinks Denzel will be unsuitable because he really seems to underappreciate how sick Diane is.
另一方面，法官认为丹泽尔也不合适，因为他似乎真的低估了黛安病情的严重程度。

He says over and over in court that she's not sick at all as far as he knows.
他在法庭上反复说，据他所知，她根本没有病。

So the judge takes this middle course in a points one of Diane's friends.
所以法官采取了折中方案，指定了黛安的一位朋友。

Marshall Losh is the guardian.
马歇尔·洛什担任监护人。

Hmm.
嗯。

And what do both sides end up making of that middle course starting with Denzel?
双方最终如何看待这个折中方案，先从丹泽尔说起？

I think he still feels liberated by the decision.
我想他仍然对裁决感到解脱。

That's who Diane wanted when they asked Diane, would she like your guardian?
当有人问黛安希望谁做她的监护人时，那就是黛安想要的人。

She said Marshall.
她说马歇尔。

He's friendly with all the news appointed guardian.
他对所有新指定的监护人都很友好。

And with her permission, he gains the right to see Diane whenever he wants, also to move back into her house.
得到她的允许后，他获得了随时探视黛安的权利，也可以搬回她的房子。

I was there three times a day to see her with children.
我每天去三次见她，带着孩子。

Three times a day.
一天三次。

And so he kind of continues doing what he'd been doing before visiting her every day, spending the day.
于是他基本上继续做他之前做的事：每天去看她，陪着度过一天。

I mean, I knew she was getting worse.
我是说，我知道她在恶化。

That dementia only went one way.
那种痴呆症只会朝一个方向发展。

Yeah.
是的。

And I get delighted when I get there.
我到那里时感到很欣慰。

He does start to notice at this time that Diane isn't what she used to be.
他此时确实开始注意到黛安已经不如从前了。

Well, I don't remember what her makeup wanted.
嗯，我不记得她化妆的事了。

I think that was my first thing I noticed.
我想那是我注意到的第一件事。

It sort of starts with her makeup.
这大概是从她的化妆开始的。

I mean, she was a very attractive lady.
我是说，她曾是一位非常有魅力的女士。

She was a rich and a father that she can turn hands, you know, or shaken.
她很有钱，而且她能轻而易举地做到……你知道，或者颤抖。

And so I actually helped her put her makeup on.
所以我实际上帮她化妆。

I probably didn't do a real good job.
我可能做得不太好。

But I helped her put her makeup on every morning.
但我每天早上都帮她化妆。

And as Diane's dementia got worse, she's moved to a different facility, and nursing home with a specialized memory care unit.
随着黛安的痴呆症恶化，她被转移到不同的机构，一个设有专门记忆护理单元的疗养院。

But Denzel keeps visiting her there, and his visits continue until 2020.
但丹泽尔继续去那里探望她，他的探视一直持续到2020年。

The pandemic.
疫情。

The COVID.
新冠疫情。

Yeah.
是的。

When the COVID started again, you know, I couldn't get her out of here anymore.
当新冠疫情再次开始时，我再也无法把她带出这里了。

Diane, some days seem to understand what was going on, but other times seemed to know nothing of the pandemic.
黛安有些日子似乎明白发生了什么，但其他时候似乎对疫情一无所知。

And it got to her results.
这影响到了她。

She would see time.
她会看到时间。

She said, I know you can get in here.
她说：“我知道你能进来。”

You just don't want to, you know, not really hurt.
你只是不想，你知道，不是真的难受。”

Because she understood COVID at first, but then they got to receive it and understand the COVID.
因为她起初理解新冠，但后来她们开始接受并理解新冠。

Yeah.
是的。

She accused Denzel of choosing not to visit her of being allowed to come inside, but not wanting to.
她指责丹泽尔选择不去看她，说他被允许进来，但不想进来。

We just had a really good few years here.
我们在这里过了几年真正的好日子。

But that all ended.
但那一切都结束了。

That dementia is, to me, is worse than cancer.
那种痴呆症，对我来说，比癌症更糟糕。

And then eventually it became less clear to Denzel that Diane always knew who he was.
然后最终，丹泽尔越来越不确定黛安是否总是知道他是谁。

And it was around that time.
大概就是那个时候。

He says that he stopped visiting.
他说他停止了探视。

And it's an untidy goodbye.
那是一次不体面的告别。

And it's incomplete.
而且不完整。

It's just one day of as it is hard.
只是有一天，很难。

And then that's the last that Denzel ever sees Diane again.
那是丹泽尔最后一次再见到黛安。

So let's return to Chris and to Julie.
那么让我们回到克里斯和朱莉。

What do they do after they find out about the judges decision in the guardian case?
他们在得知法官在监护权案中的裁决后做了什么？

So Chris and Julie go back to their respective homes.
于是克里斯和朱莉回到了各自的家中。

And immediately they start working on an appeal, but they also continued this relentless sort of effort to get in touch with their mother.
她们立即开始准备上诉，但她们也继续这种不懈的努力，试图与母亲取得联系。

But their calls wouldn't be put through.
但她们的电话打不通。

They'd get friends to call to sometimes and just try desperately to get word of Diane.
她们有时让朋友打电话，拼命想得到黛安的消息。

And none of that worked until.
但这些都没用，直到。

This is Erin.
我是艾琳。

Can I help you?
有什么可以帮您的？

Hi, Erin.
嗨，艾琳。

Can I speak to Diane in a real, yes, please?
我能和黛安通话吗？是的，请稍等。

Yes, just in it.
是的，请稍等。

Okay.
好的。

One day, Julie's friend Mary calls the nursing home and to everyone's surprise.
有一天，朱莉的朋友玛丽打电话给疗养院，令所有人惊讶的是。

She's put through to Diane.
她被接通到了黛安那里。

Hello, Diane.
你好，黛安。

This is Mary.
我是玛丽。

I called you last week.
我上周给你打过电话。

Yeah.
是的。

How are you doing today?
你今天怎么样？

I'm fine.
我很好。

You're getting better.
你越来越好了。

Okay.
好的。

Mary and Diane were able to talk a couple of times.
玛丽和黛安通了几次话。

And it was clear that Diane's cognition was very diminished at this point.
很明显，黛安此时的认知能力严重衰退。

She seemed confused a lot of what she said.
她看起来很困惑，说的话很多都不连贯。

Didn't make a lot of sense.
很多话都说不通。

But what was clear was that she was unhappy where she was living in this basement unit of the local nursing home.
但清楚的是，她住在当地疗养院的地下室单元并不开心。

So I called your daughter, Julie, and she's finding you a different place to live.
所以我打电话给你的女儿