I'm back with another bonus episode may possible by our community of donors known lovingly as the household It's their support that pays for this independent podcast and actually would gave me the idea to release these two episodes together They get a lot of bonus behind the scenes content and they heard one story Told twice to two different people and they response to it. Let me know that maybe this is something everybody would be into Anyway, if you would like to become a member of the household and support the show and get all the behind the scenes goodies You can visit our ancestors were messy that supercast dot com slower more the link is also in the show notes For this story, I traveled to five cities to tell one story about a group of revolutionary ancestors who made history in ways that I Think it's very important to remember on America's 250th anniversary Thank you to my guests and to everyone that came out to see a show in Toronto New York City Charlottesville Richmond, Virginia and Washington, DC You are gonna get to hear two of those shows in your feed But if you'd like to hear take away is from every city check the link in your show notes They'll be information about how to sign up for the newsletter and that is where I will tell you everything But for now here's one of two cities I really hope that you find hearing history from two different perspectives As illuminating as I could Okay, enjoy the show The secret adventures of black people presents our ancestors were messy a band of more weary deaths and mark on a quest to find the promised land along the way They'll face obstacles that pit them against the elements the unemployed and each other This episode stars New York Times columnist and 2020 MacArthur Fellow Tracy Macmillan caught him their host Nicole Hill live from the ICA at BCU This is our ancestors Ramesse. A show about our ancestors and all their drama Tracy Edgar I'll head this is so wild to me So we'll just do quick backstory before we get into it I have been following Tracy just obsessively and like a just every day refresh refresh As Tracy said anything what's what are we gonna do? What's the direction we need to take for years now and For the past as the show came out last year people have been like you know Tracy knows about your show and she wants to come on. I've been like that's not true There's not it's as impossible not only did I want to come on I don't think I've ever campaigned for anything in my life I kept everybody out across past was up and I had you heard this show It's about the only one I really you know, and I really enjoyed and I really like which is very true by the way I told you the same as I really like this threading of two things that are very important to me Which is our cultural history, but also to see us in Context where we get to be our full of selves. That's what the mess and the drama is because those things to me aren't antithetical And I love to show I love to set up that was so creative and brilliantly done And I was like, I listen to about two three times. I was like, oh my god, I'm not on this show So I started saying to people true All right, I want to be on any work. I only had to bully her to do it But we made it and my last pit stop was I think Jason Reynolds is the one who got this done by the way Because we're backstage at a thing and I said hey look I want to do this show. He's like, yeah, yeah I'm seeing the golden mark. I said, well, you tell her I would like an email, please and he did he did I don't believe you but shout out to Jason. Yeah, and she okay because he's the one who finally texted you Oh, yeah, that's why I give me one of my favorite human beings. Shout out to you. Okay. So thanks to you. Yeah, thanks to you All right, let's get started. Okay. All right, so my first question to you How many generations back can you trace your family history in America? Do you know is a great question? We are not a deeply literate in my family until at my great-great-grandmother's generation Despite that we have been able remarkably to go back. I think we can do I think we can do six or seven generations all in eastern North Carolina. So part of the reason why we can trace it so far Because we didn't move And so we still have the oral history so again, you know those parts before we have like great records in a very literate But we were very grounded in robust and county North Carolina And so actually, yeah, I can we can go back pretty far Okay, next question. How has the black church influenced your identity as a black American? If at all. Oh, um, I feel a bit like an alien with this one. A big part of my personal story is Despite looking I know what I look like. I know I look like the South. I like that about myself. It was cool. My family was not particularly religious and where we were from that Significant now we went to church the church is more than you know Faith it was our cultural institution is educational institution and so there's a church right on the edge of our family land We see it has a rallying for the building of prospect. I mean shout out to prospect Amy I think we got 19-20 members right now So poor small cow So certainly we have the ritual. So the way I like to say it now is that I am culturally Black southern Christian, but we I was not race for example, and I think it was really important for me because what I didn't get was like the sense of natural Deference To power because my great I mean it was very It was very uncommon for her time, but like I remember my great grandmother saying I listen to no man on a stage Tell me nothing and I just really took that the heart If you can believe it and I really struggle to believe that But so like we participate, but there was a certain she always kept this sort of distance and I think that was handed down To the women of my family. All right one last question. What kind of black are you? I love you because I don't know if anybody would be bold enough to ask the guy, but also for you to be able to because I know exactly what you mean Um, I don't think I'm I think there's a has been in my life like there's a gap between the kind of black folks think I am And how I see myself. Yeah, so so funny you say this. I don't think I ever said it's publicly, but Okay, I can tell you what I ain't I ain't I ain't a black elite. I ain't talented tenths Wouldn't raise to be it? Yeah, went to a couple of meetings didn't like it came back home The meeting. I respect it. And I know why we have it. It's all fine. I was like, I think I'm good on that I and I but I accept that like some you know a lot of things about my life of change So I don't I'm careful to say I know people don't see me as regular black, but in my mind in my house I am a regular black person. What is a regular black person? A regular black person to me is one who Does not look to other people to define their place in the world Because so I have a I have a saying say I was like I know who's I am Right, I'm I'm not confused no matter what room I'm in I know who's I am I know the people who give me meaning I know the people who give me socials that my real social status the kind that can't be taken away Right, I Never want to lose my facility to speak to and with those people I don't want to sound like anyone else right so for me that is I know who's I am I know who brought me here as a saying goes I know who I'm leaving the party with yeah I know if it pops off I know which side I'm on I'm very clear on these things We all have to be clear. I'm clear. Yeah. Yeah. All right. Well We're gonna get into it. So okay go. I have this so nervous slightly worried about I wonder who we got okay go ahead Oh, because you know the story. Oh, I'm so nervous. Okay Let's get into it. Here we go. All right, so we're gonna picture this like a movie. Okay It is 1775 We're in the filly home of one of the most famous Americans in the world Benjamin Franklin In the living room behind closed doors Benjamin is fighting with his beloved only son William Franklin and here's why At the moment there are around two million largely European migrants living in the 13 colonies Native Americans would call these people illegals They're pretty diverse different languages and religions and cultures, but some say you can divide everybody up this way A third Benjamin Franklin included are like we're done With the British we're called Patriots and we want to do the American Revolution Another third are like we hate politics leave us out of this and the final third including William Franklin This is oh, thank you so much. Yeah, yeah, it's in everybody And the final third including William Franklin the son are like we need to stick with the British We're called Loyalists and we're gonna stop this American insurrection In the movie Benjamin Franklin is yelling at his son. He's saying you're gonna be a loyalist slave to the British Because calling people slaves for fighting with the British, you know, this is the whole thing Even though they have slaves. It's just cognitive dissonance. I know it's just very every time I'm reading this stuff I'm like blows your mind, I know so he's like, okay, you're gonna be slave you're gonna go with the British and William is like dad Why are you going against our king over the boston massacre only like five people died? That's not a massacre. It's fake news These two will go on to fight on opposite sides of the war Afterwards despite William's attempts at reconciliation Benjamin Franklin will die having never forgiven his son for siding with the British America was a house divided from the very start But this is not a story about the Franklin's In the movie listening to this fight just outside the living room are Joseph Jemima Peter King Othello George and Bob These are all the people that Benjamin Franklin enslaved in his lifetime They turn to each other and say the thing that's got to be on the minds of the 500,000 enslaved black people across the 13 colonies Who's side of this are we on? This is the story of our ancestors revolutionary quest for promise land Here we go So our ancestors had to make all these choices And y'all will also have to make some choices along with trusty. This is why you have a decision board I'm gonna guide you through five Okay, and you have bells can y'all bring your bells? Oh, I didn't give you a bell, but you you got a mic Okay So when you wanted to side one way will have you ring your bells for to go one way and when you want to side the other way We'll have you ring your bells to go the other way now. I've been able to do this in five this is the fifth city Everybody gets really stressed out in the beginning. I would say don't be stressed Okay, it's gonna be really fun You know a bunch of teachers pets in here. I might want to I want to hand out with the instructions I'll trust the process. You can trust the process is gonna be so fun and what we're gonna be doing is You know, I think that maybe now is a good idea would be to introduce yourself to your neighbor because you are going to need to make some decisions together You add it once you guys judging what another I want this to be all love So once you turn to your neighbor introduce yourself real quick say hello hi neighbor Beautiful We're doing it like black church style I do exactly what this was turn to your neighbor All right now Here's the most important thing Please look at your neighbor and say I will not judge you Okay, I will not judge you Safe safe safe safe space All right, I can be a covered everything. Okay, that's that All right, y'all ready? Okay, it's still the colonial era But now we're in Essex County, Virginia with our ancestor David George Every historical account I've read describes him as a charming charismatic survivor We will be casting him later. So just keep that in mind You know the cast. He'd been bored and slave to a sadistic person will call the cruel man David sees this man torture his family and he's terrified that he's going to be next so he runs Before our ancestors running was only the beginning because people that traffic and humans don't just let them go They own businesses where the labor is free and if you build a whole country with free labor It'll be competitive on the global market and no time So industries evolved to keep enslaved people enslaved After David runs the cruel man chases him across Virginia. He's bought and sold a few times by other people always with the cruel man on his heels Eventually David is sold to someone down and silver bluff South Carolina and he escapes the cruel man for good On this new plantation David meets and marries a very brave a very resilient sounding woman named fillis So based on what you've heard so far Who would you cast to be our David George and who can be our fillis? Okay, so you said charismatic charismatic very charismatic Clearly was brave Enterprising got himself a woman He did right promise and okay, so he's got to be attracted a little bit. Yeah, so I'm gonna go with So bad. I'm so obviously a black woman of a certain generation. I only know what are you saying? My brain can like process But I'm like is there no I don't know So it's like the question of what you did. That's the only question But okay, so if we take this is all because immediately that man has done a no I like some of these Young actors who are This is what they might go be Jordan. Wow He's already been cast. Oh, I like Sterling K-Brown is a good one. Oh The bell's got the soul eyes where I think he could do Then okay, I'm gonna I like Sterling K-Brown. We like Sterling. Yes, the bell's have spoken all right Okay Now Sterling needs a wife who's gonna be our fillis. I know I liked them so much I said his wife and that was my first thought because we liked them to get there so much Now the only thing I am gonna go out there because I think there is something too hard that we haven't quite Like scratched the surface up. I really really like The direction Quinta Oh I do there's something there that I don't think she's gotten the perfect vehicle to see there's something behind it girl's eyes Oh, we like you know we like it. Okay. All right This is fun. That's our cap. That is surprising. We haven't had Quinta cast before Give it to her here we go. All right, so everybody picture Sterling and Quinta So David and Phyllis Sterling Quinta have a child and a situation seems calmer in silver blood this new and flavor is in Violent like the last one or he's an adds violent but David does fall into what sounds like a depression Now today we'd point to the family separation the escapes the captures knowing his child had just been bored and slave As like the triggers for the depression but at the time he's just like I don't know what is wrong with me You know, they're obviously not thinking that much about mental health. They don't have all that kind of stuff So David he'd never really gotten into Christianity before but he decides to try praying It doesn't help but he keeps at it and eventually he does hear God say I will send you deliverance Could this be a sign that he should try running again? It's time for our first major decision. Okay Imagine you're in his shoes you tried to escape slavery before you hadn't worked out But you're miserable right now and you do believe that God has just told you deliverance is coming Knowing that you have a partner in a child. Let's imagine the kid is like under five Would you try to escape again and hopes that maybe you can solve this terrible feeling or would you try to figure it out and stay where you are? I'm gonna ask Tracy and then I'm gonna ask the crowd and you can talk us through your decision Okay, this is such a complicated one because I think because we carry like this deep Epigenetic shame of having ever been enslaved I think we like to imagine ourselves as always I would have always chosen a run. Right. I will always like right try to kill my slavery right not realize I'm like the whole set on my mom Oh, you want to imagine that I'm okay Mr. Ms. Morals So we like we like to think of that, but I do think you know just like statistically that under Estimates one how hard that is yes, and it also casts the people who stayed as somehow deserving Of having been enslaved now. I just always take that personally a person from the south a lot of people who didn't move a lot Right the idea that you stayed because you were mec Or feeble in some way. I've always struggled with that so I think I'm gonna again regular black person over here I love to think I would strike out on my own and I actually think as the mother I'd be more likely to so I think if I'm quince I'm more likely to run because I'm thinking to the child But I think if I'm the man I think if I'm David I think I try to step And make community especially if I've now started turned into religion Maybe a church That's what we did we create a space you know they can enslave us in a place, but in a space where free right You know and our minds and the stories we tell and the hymnles we're seeing I can imagine if I'm smart Yeah, try to one South Carolina's a whole lot further away from freedom. Yes, then feel okay And South Carolina was brutal and I'm thinking if I don't make it, man God, what would happen to me? I think I'm staying in like trying to build a church or community maybe yeah All right If you are Stay let's hear it ring your bells Thank y'all for not leaving me out here by myself. I appreciate that And if you're running let's hear it. I'll so fine. Yeah, I feel you. I do I get it. I get it I think we have it's more people running like about two thirds. Would you say I always say so? Yeah, or sorry, I'm sorry two thirds are saying yep about a third I have always thought reading their accounts something that always comes up is their family and I'm like if you had my family If I'm in my family you don't need chains. That's right. I'm not going to go without my mother. Yes, right. You know that I'm being like this So yeah, right You all made it through the first decision. Well time. That wasn't so bad. All right So let me say what David George decided he decides to stay Yeah, okay, but he is miserable. Yes. He keeps trying prayer. He keeps looking to the horizon for deliverance and he says that that starts to make him feel better Then a black Baptist pastor named brother Lyle stops by the plantation during the colonial era Baptists and Methodists were welcoming to converts from the laboring class across race But in different ways Just keep that in mind got it So brother Lyle's preaching and he's like y'all. God said come unto me all you that labor and I will give you rest And David is like God likes laborers. I love that So in addition to praying he's learns to read he starts scrolling through the Bible He's like like like like like like he didn't fill his joy and brother Lyle's congregation and eventually David is offered the position of pastor Yeah, people just like like him. He's very you know Sterling you said he was charismatic That's why I thought I think he's standing he's making a church because that's what that's a preacher and that's what he did Yeah, yeah, okay, so he He actually he gets invited to be the pastor of this church that he joined and he's like no He doesn't think that he's fit but eventually he says okay He gets their enslaved or to give them a barn for their services and they name it Silver Bluff Baptist and it becomes one of the very first black churches in America Wow Under David Silver Bluff Baptist grows from eight to 30 members. Yes, and press it. That's more than a little church It was good His congregation is made up of our ancestors fellow captives They're all likely to have experienced violent assaults and to have witnessed their loved ones being violently assaulted But I imagine it's Silver Bluff. They get to enjoy at least for a little while a sense of safety everybody say safety In that safety they tell each other Bible stories Historians note that black folks across the colony seem to love one story in particular It's there. I want to dance with somebody they're living on a prayer. They're return of the Mac It's the Exodus tale. That's right. Mm-hmm of how God sided with enslaved laborers over wealthy Faros and eventually sent deliverance everybody say deliverance In the form of Moses who parted the seas and led them into the promise land So in the movie everybody's in church getting down they're having so much fun David is preaching There's so into it in my movie he'll lead his congregation and singing one of our people's most powerful hymns Okay, so the song was Kirk Franklin's revolution. I can't play it now for likes and sing reasons But you should go listen to the chorus and then the black black and then come right back Yes, that ancient Negro spirit Spiritual y'all. No, I'm sorry. Kirk Abraham Franklin Nice So they sing that it's all in all the books that it's not in the books. They don't want you to know And then the American Revolution arrives in silver bluff All right, so in 1779 They hear that the red coats are coming and David Georges and slavery just runs away He just like leaves everybody there. White On a South Carolina desk exactly what I expect That is literally exactly what I expect. They're like oh my god. Okay, yeah, and now our ancestors Entressy and all of you have some decisions to make. Okay, so black folks They're meant to be in this information black out at this point in in time and slavers worry that all the talk of all Men being created equal will give them ideas right there already have the ideas But they're all these whisper networks across plantations for example black people who are forced to deliver the male from plantation The plantation would also drop off news and gossip to black folks and maybe that's why or maybe that's how Everybody heard what was going on in Virginia let me tell you about it so picture Maybe we're gonna have Quinta doing this park. Well, there's gonna be doing a little exposition dumps I guess what I heard. Oh, I can tell you here So in 1775 Lord Dunmore governor of Virginia said listen and say people I proclaim that if you fight for the British you'll be free A guy named Harry Washington from a plantation called Mount Vernon was like But now he tried escaping this plantation before but his in slavery George Washington had always hunted him down and dragged him back But then work gets out about Lord Dunmore's emancipation Proclamation and Harry escapes for good He dawns a red coat. He fights for the British There was also this other guy everyone calls Colonel Ty He escaped slavery in New Jersey and joined the British where he got command of a gorilla unit specializing in raids Ambuses and assassinations the paper say that men like him serve in uniforms with liberty to slaves written across their chest That's so attractive I mean, I just I really liked that disposition. I liked that. I like a man who'll show up with yeah I do I work at that number of lives. Yeah, look I can't get in there. I really like that I don't know what that's all you about looking with the bloody Yeah, I don't know the link to it, but fine. I like that. Oh should be careful We don't really need to cast him, but if we did have to have him who could have played in the blame? Now I now that went right because I think he does fierce well I will go with Michael be Jordan. I will allow that one on this Yeah, yeah, somebody said all this hog. Oh, that's a youth set All this hog. Oh, yeah, okay also also okay. We can have them both kind of audition Because well, yes, it's hard work. It's hard, but I let them come in auditions. We're willing to allow Okay, so just to catch us back up The kind of question is what I go fight for the British They just offered me freedom and exchange for service And maybe you're wondering how does anybody know that the British will actually free them? Just so I say that would be my thing. How do you trust they're so far? That's a distant master. Yep as opposed to the master. I know yes And like free me way or like I'm not going back to I just I would have so many questions about the logistics just a hundred percent Yeah, and let's they had someone there to explain those logistics to me. Yes, and I'm like man I don't know you. Well, this is what they can this is what they can offer They promise oh That was it Yeah, I don't know why they got a document. Let's get ready to show them. Oh, they promise They play pretty promise. Okay, so now trusty and then all of you who side are you going to choose? Are you going to fight for the American Patriots or are you going to fight with the British loyalist? Yeah, there's a murmur in the room. What will trust see you? Again, there is no question in my mind that there is one of the inherited values from my people that I get is The devil you know is better than the one you don't I have a there's an expertise and slave people have at this point They know why people better than they know themselves I know where they live. They sleep on how they eat. I know what their fears are right That's power. Information is power. I don't have any way to know about the British right and the literacy is I would need to even start you know I have been denied me I think I'm going to lean into my expertise. I know those white people I think I just I don't think I would trust the British and I would be thinking what I know about my enslavers is too powerful. I'll fight with them, but that is also because I know I'll know how to resist and I'll know how to maybe even kind of control them a bit. Wow And if I've been enslaved even a little bit of control is goes a long way too. It goes a very long way So I think that would be my choice now because I love the idea of America a freedom But because I don't know those people right all right if you would fight for the Americans let's hear it All right team mates it goes down at noon and if you would fight for the British let's hear it Oh, it's kind of 50 cents. I will say from what I know of this like the loyalists were better out Like if I'm hungry now I'm going to a loyalist because they apparently you know they had Yeah, they did have yeah, yeah, that was also a lot of good that's right that was a lot of the appeal Right there can't they were healthier you get clothing you do so I totally get I think there are lots of reasons, but yeah Okay fair enough all right He surprised me 50 50 I know so many I love it. Is that true in Virginia maybe maybe you know what so I've done this in Toronto New York Charlottesville Was the Washington DC now Richmond this is the first time anyone has ever chosen Americans I think it's cuz it's what That is fascinating yeah, and the majority of the room also chooses the British Yeah, this is the first time it's ever gone this way. Okay, we're going to have to unpack that later Yeah, yes, I was like That's really yeah Well, I mean, so what do we think that is Is it just identifying with at this point maybe the American brand is so tarnished? I think the way that you are also breaking it down Like the devil you know versus the devil you don't yeah, versus the kind of the I don't know the Hopfulness or the kind of feeling of like I just maybe that will be better. Let me reach over there I think that also kind of Is it the way we're thinking about it? But this is the first time it's ever happened. I'm gonna be thinking about that for quite Yes, we do Okay, how do I summarize and on the 250 is anniversary of America right to also Be thinking that way. I do I think that says something about how we feel about this country Yeah, and that just if we take it another fork in the road Maybe we could have gotten it better or there could have been a better solution and maybe you're thinking Then you also aren't built on this foundational contradiction right building a democracy on top of slavery Which that's the fundamental that's the only contradiction that America cannot resolve and why it cannot be What it needs to be so I can see thinking okay? We didn't resolve we messed it up. Let's go the other way But what an interesting thing to be thinking about 250 All right So five to 8,000 enslaved and free black people fought for the Americans 15 to 20,000 black people fought for the British including the members of silver bluff Baptist church Wow, yeah, you don't say yeah, they really did it and we don't really know how many Really tried to escape to get to British lines I read all kinds of wild estimates that I can't include here They're like 200,000 people tried and it's like well, you know Exactly, yeah, but we know how many went and it's 15 to 20,000 versus the five to eight And this is this promise of freedom and the hope that it's true So there are more powerful too. Yeah, and no one would have ever thought the Americans would win that war So American Britain oh wait no, so silver bluff Baptist there with the British Their station outside Savannah, Georgia and when they get there they run into brother-law This is the god digs laborers message and it sounds like America's first two Well, they're one of America's first two black pastors there among the first They they stay close to keep their congregations close They look out for each other as they navigate the horrors of war I'll just say black soldiers. I know I talked about Colonel Ty You know we got the whole Michael B. I'll just kind of show down thing going Most of the soldiers are doing like civil engineering projects people really don't want to give black people guns Yes, we are That really is it very real. So this elite squad this G unit has guns But for the most parts people are doing like Not that Thank you very much But yeah, okay that yeah Most of them it's like building trenches building for it. These are civil engineers These are people who know how to get these things built really really well They've been forced to know yeah, it's not some most people are doing okay So they are navigating the horrors of war, but then in 1781 the British surrender at Yorktown and our civil Bluff Baptist congregations learns that they had picked the losing side Yeah, I know So American Britain meet up to negotiate their divorce George Washington is like I want all our property back Including those black loyal to some yeah, he's a hairy Washington where is he give him back to me? Yes, you know Sir guy Carlton is the lead negotiator for the British and he's like well, actually the black loyalists are free Because we promised okay That's all me Okay, I never said you should follow me Because fair enough fair enough My They say that this is about an honor that's right on our monkeys, huh? But also the British know how crucial slavery is to America's economic model They just want to like say one of the ones they want to stick it to yeah, so yeah, so George and guy fight and fight But eventually Carlton offers a compromise He's like all right so listen, he's not usually work out for us Hold up a compromise Here's the cover, okay He's like I'm gonna take a bunch of the loyalists including the black ones You are a text now Let's Colluting the black ones up to Nova Scotia This is a nearby British colony Yes, but that came from for them It's just like going to another stay. I know for us is like whoa Nova Scotia, but it's just another colony Right another British colony. So it's like we're gonna take them there because they're the nearest colony that hasn't betrayed us And We'll tally up the value of all the black people that we take and then we'll like send your check or something Yeah, is they good? Yeah, don't worry about it George Washington is like I know you don't pay us exactly because he knows he wouldn't pay you You don't see what to pay that, but guy Carlton is like knows you. W I promise So word goes out to the black loyalist that if they can make a teneeric city find the right location Get their name in a ledger call the people me see I do I knew that was fine The many you said the word compromise. I was like this these do not work out for my people You got to get to New York need to get to New York you need to find this bar Francis tavern still there You need to get your name in a ledger. You need to collect your certificate of freedom proving your military There's a certificate involved paperwork. Yeah. Yeah, yeah And then you got to get on a ship and then you can stay free and I'm getting on a ship. You got to get to Nova Scotia That's how I got here. That's like, yeah All the stars that is how all this started. I don't go on a cruise ship now Okay, that course To the live memory of a ship It's the only one way man. You're gonna have to do it. Maybe or not maybe okay. We'll see David George and fill us in silver bluff are in South Carolina when this plan is hatched So I'm sure they're wondering how are we gonna get to New York City? Are we gonna do all that stuff? But then they find a loophole because people love David somebody's like David I got the hook up. There's a boat that's leaving to Nova Scotia straight from here. So I think South Carolina Okay, you have to hustle. Yeah, so in the movie David and fill us tell everyone all right We got this boat to Nova Scotia every get ready hurry up hurry up hurry up So we should picture them There in the right spin. They're in the tent. They're frantically packing. There's a little tap at the door It's brother-law and some folks from silver bluff Baptist church and they say brother David We're not going to Nova Scotia Brother-law found a ship that will take him and his people to Jamaica Well brother You know when you first mentioned him my I almost said okay liberation theology And here we are he's like I'm what now Jamaica is again. It's another colony and it's a slave colony But that's where he wants to be. That's what I can't even go you do. He was a yeah No, I mean if of my options for them Yeah, we're they're trying to avail themselves of like opportunity to be free if those are my two If you tell me it's Jamaica or is Nova Scotia I do think I'd like to think that what partly he was responding to is Again, just like that almost a you know a genetic biological pull to That's closer to home. Yeah I don't know that I think I'll be thinking that so that's where that's where he decides he wants to go Silverblood Baptist they've decided they want to go back to a silver bluff Which is the home that they know okay? Okay, and the movie everyone will say brother David sister Phyllis Nova Scotia how do y'all know that this isn't a trick to rein slave you like why would you trust the British And David will say well because the British promised So now at a time for major decision number three Are you going to get on this boat to Nova Scotia without any of your friends or are you going to stay in America? Try figure it out. Oh, sorry. Thank you. I say where is the Jamaica I know people always ask about that There's no I can only get there's no Jamaica option. Okay brother laughs. No, we fool. Okay. Oh, yeah Exactly, and you know in the movie. I feel like they have now known each other and brother lies like now We good. I don't know why but I just feel like something sirling. I'm tired. Yeah, but okay, so whether you go I am still so doubtful about Believing the British That at this point again, so which one is the more imminent threat, right? I know for a fact if I stay I go bad. I know system or bad for you. So that's to be clear. Okay, so then the great unknown becomes a little better because anything I'm thinking is better than that. Right. He is already tried to escape before. Yes Has a family now. He's got a family. Yeah, has developed literacy. He can figure it out. Yep And listen, there's no greater I think power than Knowing that whatever happens, I can handle it. Yes, and I think that's one thing literary Seek gives us. Well, drop me down. I can figure it out. There'll be a book. There'll be some instruction, you know, and so I think if he's got that If I got that I think at that point I go to Nova Scotia. You ready here going? You're gonna go. All right If you are going to Nova Scotia, let's hear it Really going to Nova Scotia All right, and if you are staying in America, let's hear it Okay, that's fair. All right, we got a few All right, so it was overwhelming majority for the audio later Overwhelming majority. There go into Nova Scotia. Yeah, we play a lakeside on the way out the door. We go And there is a kind of a thing to think about which is that these are religious people. Yeah, they've got to have the story now Yes, exactly. So when you have that to follow that dog will protect us in the wilderness and maybe that is where we're going Exactly, but that is where God calls you. Yeah, and they've got a story. This is why stories are so important Stories are the only thing that changed the world, man, and this is why because when you're faced with choices that are bigger than anything You could actually probably Just settle for yourself. It's bigger than anything you know. Yes, all you've got is why God a story this is If I step out there, and that's why people move That's such a great example to me. We are in church right now. Oh, wow Wow All right, so when I got all kinds of a caught up in what you were saying here we go When the members of silver bluff Baptist returned to South Carolina they are likely re-inslaaved, but They keep silver bluff Baptist going and it is still an operation Wow They keep it going. We got to look at two hundred and seventy when you are black in America We just don't get those kinds of numbers. Yes, hashtag history. Yeah, that's just so stunning to see even see that number. Yes, okay So they keep it going When brother Lao makes it to Jamaica he becomes an indentured servant and that eventually he's free He opens Baptist churches across the island that teach countless black children and adults to read at great personal risk They say like 10,000 people by my own Yeah, I'm always suspicious of the store But he had such an impact on literacy on the island and that's what he was doing to for both enslaved people and free people Okay, that's amazing. That's his legacy After the American Revolution 20,000 loyalists black and white choose to relocate to Nova Scotia David George, fill us in their kids are among that number. Yeah, so they're on the boat In the movie we'll see Sir Guy Carlton on the Docks in New York City his general birch approaches and hands him the book of Negroes This contains the names and escape stories of 3,000 black loyalists Birch will say sir. I've total the value of all the black loyalists in this ledger so that you can pay George Washington back like you promised At this Carlton will laugh and laugh and say imagine paying reparations for slavery I'm sure the Americans will just let it go everybody say let it go let it go All right by way of of intermission. I wanted to talk about the book of Negroes a little bit. Yes, yes, so We're actually going to hear from it this book contains the first and last names of the people who went to Nova Scotia and a little bit about Their escape story how they got free The descriptions are very disrespectful so I took those out and I just said some of the language To make it very clear, but she okay. It's going to come up and he's going to read a few of those entries These are all the people our courageous ancestors who managed to survive slavery a war make it to New York City find the right location Get their name in the ledger collector certificate and make it on to a ship to freedom when I tell you Now I told you I'm not religious that though that's my religion and that's my face That's if I came from that I mean who could be against me that's amazing seriously Brother Chiyoki Harry Washington 43 Fine fellow Formally the property of general Washington left him seven years ago Francis rough 18 Stout fellow black born at Grenada from when she was taken by General Arnold He left the general at Quebec and is now free Chloe one month Born free within British lines Phyllis Sparrow Phyllis Sparrow 28 Milado Formally slave to Charles Sudan of Brunswick, New Jersey left him seven years past with Nana Sparrow 11 Sarah Suki Sparrow Suki Sparrow Nine John Sparrow John Sparrow Three Jane Thompson Jane Thompson Seventy With a grandchild four years old Said she was born free Live with Colonel Tucker of Norfolk, Virginia left him six years ago These persons appear to be the property of William Wilson They having fallen to him in a marriage settlement Ginny Bruce 15 Fine girl three fourths white Betsy Bruce Fine girl three fourths white Hilly Ivy 12 Fine girl black Harry Jackson Harry Jackson Eight Good boy Let me just say this I go through all that I make it bureaucratic hurdles conniving geopolitics and unfaithful statesman only to get there and have you right down that I was stout And I mean this I think I will haunt you from the Andre put a rest of your lines life You were deserving Yeah all right let's bring our bells back to All right so this is a little fun fact to start us off and two more recently when Canadian Students met the colonists aboard those ships leaving America They did not meet them as traders or losers They know them as the United Empire Loyalists the principal Gentile wealthy all white heroes of the American insurrection So this is a little different in campus Yeah, yeah, so it's the summer of 1783 now we're back in time 20,000 Loyalists have begun arriving on a rocky little peninsula up by main called Nova Scotia There's a large white population already there that's mainly Examericans the first nations would call these people illegals Everyone starts bread. Oh, yeah, did y'all see where Nova Scotia you see where is this So everyone starts spreading out across the province, but 10,000 black and white people head to a town on the southern coast called Shelburne Everybody says it's pretty empty We don't know why We're about it the Loyalists Okay, the Loyalists vet expect to arrive and receive a plot of land with rations waiting for them The black Loyalists expect all that to plus Freedom everybody say freedom freedom Okay, so when I'm researching I'll read just like this one line of something And it'll be like so and so ended up here and I'll be like why like yeah, what happened? What would lead you to make this decision and it's just not in there and so what researchers often do these soren's do They sort of form a hypothesis and start researching the hypothesis So I have formed a hypothesis that I'm going to take us all on a journey into as to why this one line It's in love a hypothesis. Let's go. Okay. I love All right, so we know that David heads to Shelburne while fill us in the kids stay in Halifax This is presumably until David finds work in housing. Okay, so let's imagine all the boats docking White folks start heading in the direction of Shelburne But black folks head in the opposite direction Forish miles and a river away So we're picturing David he's looking around he's confused then he bumps into Harry Washington So we know he'd survive the war he managed to know this goes to David says we're all the black people going Harry says to the promised land follow me. Oh, they head to a lush green community in the forest that the black Loyalist named birch town It's not the best spot in the province is right on the water. It's near swamp, but it is run by the elite fighters that serve under the late great Colonel Ty who died valiantly in battle Colonel Ty he's back. Okay, so these men they aren't city planners, but during the war they specialize in ray And that's right in a fast no, they'll be safe Mm-hmm and rumor has it that when this gee unit when they left America, they'd kept their guns Yeah, so maybe that is why 2000 out of 3,000 black Loyalists choose to live in birch town. Yes, right everybody goes so Colonel Ty has passed away But his fighters in memory still remains so they have set up shopping birch town most of the black people set up shop there too The living in birch town is tough the black Loyalist get fewer rations and supplies because science says that they are our less human Right they get to talk into the meekmog indigenous people though and they learn that shell burn in the surrounding area It's solid rock. It's completely Unfarmable the land's terrible. That's why it's so empty the meekmog are like we wouldn't live here All right, we only come here in the summertime. What are you guys doing? Uh-huh So the black person like oh my god the British but the meekmog are like don't worry We're gonna help you out. We're gonna help you build what are called pit houses Which is when you dig they they're dug them to the ground and you use pine trees to build the roof Okay, and this is all they have to do it this way because the British won't give them lumber Right, so but the meekmog are like okay, we're gonna thier it out So they got homes the black Loyalist organized work crews and safety patrols and then I'm sure the New England blacks Teach us other blacks to like okay. This is winter. It's coming get ready. You know, it's yeah That's I'ma tell you true. I was thinking so petty where you said they went south for some reason. I was thinking yes But I know I know every time I tell the spread and this is why I was like Is it gonna come up every time black people were like Nova Scotia like cold? I don't know where it is cold Spirit We're gonna be all right. It's gonna be cool. Yeah, so but the New England blacks know how to deal with it They look okay. You guys get ready So this is by no means a perfect scenario, but the black Loyalist of Burch town are now the largest community A free black people on the continent and likely in the world outside of Africa So history only captures the misery of Burch town, but let's do an exercise. Let's imagine You're finally free for the first time ever. Yeah, if you were in their shoes What do you think you would do with your time now that it's your own? That's just it whatever I want Because that is the point right we just tell them at this early with Lisa like that's the point You can do whatever you want. I would I would Expect that again, we're just talking about human beings and based on the things we just heard many of them still relatively young I'm thinking I'm forming families left and right The idea did you know you can put down the rules and like shoes and you could like you know All of that emerges for the first time I'm thinking what has been the through line from my people is that they start a school I mean, you know, I just I will forever be stunned that the you know what three years out of slavery And we have essentially a school system. Yeah, that's just that's remarkable. So I'm thinking in schools There's religion obviously so I'm thinking a church right and there would be a drive I'd be building a lot of faith communities But yeah, this is fascinating, but yeah, I think I would just you they're choosing Yeah, just making choices every day whichever ones they want What would you do in the wilderness? Yeah, I wonder you went to in the and out in the great but can't you tell? I'm I'm such an outdoor girl. Can't you tell? Just hiking every day You love hiking. Everyone's always saying look at trusty on another high So I just think I believe in a during COVID shutdowns. I did start hiking a lot There's all we can do so I will hide but I'm not sleep it. I don't do not I'm not on our right But I'm like I say these folks have been working hard. We're born to be units a labor. Yeah, I'm thinking I ain't hiking So like my mother things I'm afraid she's like you know a hard I work the never use a outhouse or anything again in my life And you want me to sleep outside like she thinks camping is like a pathology Yeah, so no I don't think I'm doing that but I can't see like developing leisure like a leisure activity would emerge right And you're in like nature. I can just I can't imagine like a lot of exploring I can imagine doing a lot of you know again. They bring a lot of skills with them There you know you've got people who know how to do plants and you know botany and to make things I'm thinking that I would be doing that type of thing with the land Yes, since now I can and I have to worry about hiding it from a master. Yeah, but all those things at basically I had to hide. Yes, that's why I'd be thinking you know the um the sister in centers Yes, I'm pretty yes, oh, that's pretty much me. Yeah, I'm making postions I'm doing you know, but like freely just out in the open yes, well you did mention churches Yes, and the black loyalists are super Christian okay Religion is to them what the algorithm is to us got it brought to you by shady people you shouldn't trust But yet you like you engage you follow I am gonna steal that so hard You have no idea I'm stealing it, but okay, that is so amazing Their influencers are the preachers and the equivalent of their phones is the Methodist meeting house They turn to it for everything. It's where the kids go to school Where people get married and of course where they have church In my movie pastor David George heads to the Methodist meeting house He's gonna go meet with their lead pastor so we'll see David in the sanctuary. He's waiting Expectedly maybe they'll be like a like a flashback of Kirk Franklin Revolution they all are all yes, yes, yes, I'm changing him and so suddenly an old man begins making his way down the aisle with the help of the cane He's blind. He says Brother David. I'm so pleased the Lord brought you here today, but you can tell he's not Please I was about say something tell because To this day preachers online on new preachers showing up So the minute you said they say things they're waiting to receive this great I was thinking brother he This is the first time it's happened so he didn't know this. Okay. Hi. Yeah, I've been to church To some church convention I expected nothing less, but okay, all right brother David David George says brother Moses what a blessing, but you can tell who that shade everybody always says that they're like a blessing Yes This is Moses Wilkins and aka old Moses He's a formerly enslaved minister from Virginia who managed to escape to the British lines during the war Make it up to Nova Scotia and the way that he preached the Exodus story very legendary people say he gets so into it There's congregants worried that he's gonna have a heart attack How hard he goes okay, and then we'll be David will be like well, I am now so I'm very good at preaching it I mean, you know, but people are worried about my heart too. Yeah, it was not the same So David will be like hello pastor Moses. I think I'm the perfect assistant pastor for you And I also think that here in the promised land black and white people can go to church together. Oh Moses will be like excuse me yeah Interatial church is a colonial era Baptist belief But Moses is a Methodist This is a Methodist meeting house So yes, our ancestors have just survived slavery and a war and they're now some of the freest black people in the world But Baptist and Methodist can't just go to church together. I think we all know that this is not gonna be okay So I picture all Moses telling David while your application to the ministry is denied This is Methodist country and mark my words black and white people going to church together will only lead to trouble Now it's time for our next major decision If you're David George, would you rather live in birch town with your people? But you cannot do the thing that you love which is preach or would you rather live in shall burn with a bunch of scary white people? But maybe you can preach there how much would you sacrifice for dream? Okay, okay, so I'm not first seeing you now so here's my first problem. I know I'm hopelessly Contemporary and I'm projecting I just want to admit that And I'm gonna tell you too. I'm not sure whether David is so much responded to a calling Brother David wants to be important So I'm just saying Competition is competition and I think You know the young up start smelling himself as my people say Things is his time right some of these impulses are older than nations and that's right So I'm thinking that I know what I know what I would do, but I also think I think that's different in what David would do because I actually would I if my people have just come through this yeah, I want solidarity and safety so badly I will do whatever job you assign me you're sitting birds. That's right. There's no way I'm going to put myself back into that which now may not be a legal separation But you know there are lots of ways to create differences in a press people I'm not going up back up the show. I'm gonna do that the memory of that is still too fresh But I don't think that's what it's about the day Brother David I think it's a pulpit and some follow words and some faithful church ladies I think he's like if I got to go be white people to have it. I'll do it. Okay Okay, who is going to show burn? Thank you Okay, you after back there. We want to talk about this. We'll talk about this. Well, okay, and who is staying in birch town Oh, wow, that's the room. That's the majority of the room. We did have a handful shout out to the people who are going to shower. Yeah We're not judging. Remember we said that we did it. We're not judging now. We're sorry. I said that to you I say it everybody and I will have a light meeting after this if you wanted to discuss that decision all of your decision All right, so This is all hypothesis. Okay, this was all of this is to get to this one line David George chooses to live in shall burn. Yeah, just like you guess. Yeah So our ancestor gets to shall burn and he finds that the British have prepared nothing There's no infrastructure. There's no housing. Everybody's living in tents and modern terms And modern terms. This is fire festival That's good. That's good. And they say they have no culture. I love about this is the thing you point it out Because all the skilled people like the Lord. They don't have anything. It's right. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, it makes sense Oh my god, all right, so the man who was in charge of getting the water if you know you know It's a bureaucrat from Boston named Benjamin Marston So the governor of Nova Scotia took his job as more of a retirement gig So he was like Marston. I'm gonna empower you to handle all of this loyalist resettlement business And I don't want to hear about any trouble and then he goes and he goes golfing or whatever Yeah, we don't know. He's not really in the story after that So Marston is in charge of everything and when he sees the loyalist who history remembers you remember as like loyal and noble and gentile and all this he's like Underwhelmed. Yeah, here's what he writes about them and his diary. Can I have you read that one? Yeah These poor people are like sheep without a shepherd they have no men of abilities among them Is it that? There's a shipless and lazy Okay, but he's like you know what this is what I got. I'm gonna do the best I came with what I got So I picture Marston showing up to work and he's greeted by thousands of war weary unhoused Examericans They're like Marston. Where's our land and our rations and our jobs? Also we want income equality in this colony, but they're better not be any racially quality I'll have been to that meeting you better than me Sounds familiar. I'm in an every group. I know who that is Great Marston is like, okay first of all good morning next Announcements three of them One we're gonna give you land But it has to be assigned one at a time. We got to break it up into lots and give it to you that way So can y'all form like a 10,000 person line rich people to the front obviously too We were gonna bring your food rations in by sea, but American pirates keep rating our boats So now we need to build roads to bring them in by land from a town that is miles and miles and miles and miles away Through solid rock and forest it is gonna take a while. I hope you're good at dieting or whatever Announcement number three When the black loyalists were enslaved they were forced to be carpenter's and construction workers and civil engineers And a lot of you white guys are poor x farmers We are trying to build a metropolis here so as you can imagine the business dudes of shellbird have decided to give all the jobs to the black loyalists and just pay them next to nothing This is not my fault end of announcements The white loyalists are furious of course divide and conquer from the outset by the way. This is just 101 This is just protocapitalism 101 Well, we would give y'all this wonderful stuff with those black people yeah those immigrants Those Chinese they look they showed up they took your jobs they taking your stuff I mean this is 101 this is it this is the fact what they did so they're like Marston this sucks and it's all your fault And then they open a bunch of taverns and get wasted in them and that's why out of towners come to call them the dancing beggars of shell burn No, that's very big names All right, so David heads to the part of shell burn where black people live that has been creatively named black town If we named it I love it if we didn't name it I hate that's very good point that is exactly I'm to go We would yeah, that's what I'm saying. I just assume because we would do like Listen, my people than my people since we were my people. Yes, and we got out of the two we call it black town We call it it that so I just assume but you're right. What we did? Yes, yeah, we didn't Boy yeah So it's also all tense and it sounds like here David George confronts the enormity of his choices He's separated from his family food is scarce the white loyalists have dreamt at what will much later call Jim Crow law And they are forcing them on the black town residents see was this deliverance? I'm gonna have you read what happens next Okay, I began to sing the first night at a camp black people came from far and near to listen I kept on every night in the week Then I appointed a meeting for the first lords day close by the river a great number of white and black people came And I was so overjoyed with having an opportunity once more to preach That I could not speak for tears He's turned it around then guess what oh why I give some some land and the community helps him build a Baptist meeting house Black and white people start attending and he starts baptizing people left didn't write Then drop people into the junk people come All right Praise the lord David Praise the lord then the governor hears about David George and he shipped Extrasions he's granted more land and fill us in the kids are sent from Halifax to finally reunite with him in shall burn David and fill us have homes constructed on their land for members of their congregation They appoint church elders the peace sound full David is like we are so back And so do you have any advice for our ancestors in this moment things? I'm looking up listen. I listen far be it for me a question because listen. All right I couldn't do a fourth of it. I just am deeply suspicious of this overnight investments and a single black person in black family I think that what was happening in the other town was more collective to me and this is starting to feel a little prosperity gospelish but hey I don't know nothing. I don't know everything and call. I don't know everything So I don't know I'm like on the one hand throwing it again Yes, it looks like his choices are paying off and it looks like he has been blessed but again Is that the way that God proves your blessed? I don't know I don't really like I don't like yeah, I'm a little concerned. I'm a little nervous but I am Happy for them and they're chosen. I'm really happy for that sister because he just left I mean where she been in this Halifax with the kids. Yes, see I'm so I'm I'm very happy for there. Yeah. All right Now it's summer 1784 our ancestors have been in Nova Scotia for about a year The British government has failed to live up to its promises for about a year Now the loyalist could have united to hold their government accountable but instead they turn on each other Yeah rich versus poor Baptist versus Methodist unemployed versus employed so that's why versus black And all the while more more loyal is keep pouring into shall burn so this is your classic powder keg Yep, but for now everything's fine Marston writes the following about the loyalist in his diary and for clarity and Normandy means Crime so here's what he says about them in this moment Upon the whole considering who and what they are and the confused way they are huddled together It is much in their favor that we have had no great enormities committed amongst us Yeah, so he's like these people aren't you this like the bottom of the bed But they're not working with much. Yeah, at least they haven't turned murder So one day in July 1784 David George in this congregation meet up at the Baptist meeting house This is one in Shelburne. We're picturing excitement in the air because today is baptism Sunday I don't know if it's actually Sunday, but that's the vibe, you know White all white all that so we're imagining singing and rejoicing an excitement as everyone heads on down to the river to witness people be reborn Now the gossip around Shelburne is that an out of town couple named Mr. and Mrs. Holmes have traveled to the city Specifically to be baptized by David George. Okay, Mr. and Mrs. Holmes are white This is a big deal. Uh huh, it's a big deal. That fact might be why a group of white loyalists who are likely out of work broke ex soldiers Also head on down to the river Uh oh So everybody's there. I'm picturing a couple in David George stepping into the water while fill us keeps one eye on them And the other on the white loyalist the vibe is very tense David baptizes Mr. Holmes first and everything goes fine No reports of trouble, but the white then Mrs. Holmes steps out yep Can you read David's account of what happened that oh? Okay, okay Mrs. Holmes sister laid hold of her hair to keep her from going down into the water Yes, so she runs out there into the water tries to stop this baptism so you got to picture like these two white ladies thrashing about in the river Likely because the sister does not want him baptized by this black man Well, this is a deeply intimate dance. So I said yeah, but it might be all right for it But now a black man is going to touch a white woman in public who will be wet Which is a level of transparency we think of right like yeah, know that that's huge Yeah, and he's just like I'm doing and the sister's thinking about her reputation and her yeah Yeah, okay, so somebody ends up having to call the law We can imagine Benjamin Marston shows up. He's rolling his eyes because you already know what he thinks of these people He's white loyalist. He's like the lady says she was baptized. So let me baptize So she's baptized. Okay Everybody leaves David George will be asked to give an account of this event later in his life and here's what he says happened next Several of the black people had houses upon my lot But 40 or 50 disbanded soldiers came up with the tackle of ships and Turned my house and every one of their houses quite over The meeting house they would have burned down had not the ring leader of the mob prevented it So the white loyalist had formed a mob they've destroyed David's home and the homes of those living on his land But not the Baptist meeting house and here's how David responds I continued preaching they came one night and stood before the pulpit and swore how they would treat me if I preached again I stayed and preached the next day they came and beat me with sticks and drove me into the swamp After the mob chases David into the swamp they spread out across black town Looting rioting Attaching ropes to homes and ripping them down attacking any black loyalist in sight Benjamin Marston writes about it in his diary Riot today the disbanded soldiers have risen against the free negroes to drive them out of town Because they labor cheaper than they the soldiers David George fill us in the kids escape with the rest of black town to the one place They hope that they will be safe forish miles and a river away So now most of black Nova Scotia is in birch town and likely bracing for attack And here's what the mob would have known about their community To get there they'd have to make it across the river through a lush green forest in swamps And undoubtedly all along the way there would be black men waiting for them Men like Harry Washington who escaped America's commander and chief and fought with the words liberty for slaves written across his chest Men who serve and colonel ties elite grilling and specialized raids ambushes and assassinations Yep, and rumor has it that when the veterans of birch town left America, they'd kept their guns That's right The writing continues for 10 days the white loyalist carry out attacks against government officials the wealthy and each other black town is destroyed But despite all that chaos, there are no accounts of any successful attacks on birch town The continents largest community of free black people survive the shell burn race riots Which a story inside is Canada's first and one of the continents earliest recorded race riots And you know, it's unfair to Canada because we brought that there I'm serious I'm point there. I mean it's not that they are perfect or anything and they got they don't promise speak to the indigenous peoples, but Like then we brought that yeah, you know, you can't let us in your house by which I mean you know The lawyer was the what that but yeah, I again the safety was never in being special the safety was in being in the number Yes, that's what this was exactly my fear. He was special hyper visible in town Where the class warfare between the poor white laborers and the richer white I mean this is the only way I think they can they knew the safety was being together That's why I'm going with them. That's why I'm care how uncomfortable it is Freedom is actually that's freedom is not being special Freedom is being able to choose where you feel safe. Yeah, yeah So now we're going to fast forward eight years it's 1792 when we meet back up with David George he And fill us in the kids have left for each town Imagine a little bit of a huff. Yeah, because I mean you have to picture him and fill us show up to church after being at the center of the first recorded race ride in Canadian history. Yeah, so you know and do you know what fill is Miss Annie I'm put them at you I got a clue I know what I would have been saying to him and now he got to come roll in himself on in it and every Sunday you're just there and everybody's like oh yeah Are y'all inviting any white people to church? Yeah, be sure you tell us next time You like your house. Oh, you know how to house you like it. Yeah, oh, you know church people it's just like oh, it's brutal right and it's all so sweet. Oh Oh, so happy to have you back. Oh, yes, what a blessing Yeah, so The archive does not get into any of the drama It just says that David was able to preach house to house, but in the end he and fill us left birch town because Eary threes and my own color persecuting Now Brother David Brother David You know, I know that the Exodus story is an important one type I got to tell you story is shaping up to be a much more and as instructive as asked I mean this has everything because now he's gonna be Clarence Thomas Oh, well y'all scared Y'all think Clarence can fight me I said it. I'm just just this is everything and now my own color persecuting color David Yeah, all right David becomes an itinerant preacher He's traveling from town to town and his popularity just keeps growing. Okay, so let's picture him returning home from a preaching trip one day He'll walk through his front door and a man will be standing there in front of the fire Philus will say David we have a visitor This is Thomas Peters In the movie Thomas Peters will turn around dramatically and he'll say hello David George I found a new true promise land for our people and I can get us there, but I need your help Everyone it's time to make one final decision Okay, okay, so Thomas Peters He was um he's rumored to be an African person. Here's the thing He is He's a descendant from a Europa tribe which is Nigeria he is a print so he isn't Nigeria in print so isn't native help In the way that one is And not you we're putting it like that I found it the internet Yeah, so he's a print and he needs some help getting back to his kingdom and only you can do it, but in a way You can believe Don't worry about it The color So Thomas was rumored to be an African print. He's kidnapped and enslaved in Louisiana He fought for the British and the war now is a Nova Scotia He's been going from town to town looking for work and land and in the process He's also gathering news for across black Nova Scotia He learns that even though the black loyalists were the labor force building up this colony They were barely making enough money to survive and the winter they were freezing sometimes to death And they were starving year round, but their biggest issue is slavery There were enslaved people in Nova Scotia before the black loyalists arrived there and the white loyalists did bring 2000 enslaved ancestors with them On top go far without bringing their enslaved On top of that for their former inslavers from America We're coming up to Nova Scotia and contesting black folks legal rights of freedom Some were being straight up kidnapped back into slavery So our inslavers are being disappeared and they're terrified and determined to stay free So they had to plan they put Thomas Peters in charge of executing it. Here we go He gets himself on a ship sailing to London Now not all black people know each other, but in this case it does seem like he ran into some black loyalists Back in America and so they're like oh my god like what's the word? How's it right doing over there? He tells them everything they're like oh no broth cuz they're turning British now and then You know what I like bro Yeah, it's just elbow churned me all bruh Yeah, so he tells them oh no and then they connection with the leaders of an abolitionist group called the committee for the release of the black poor So this is a group of rich well-meaning white people Grandville Sharpe is the man in charge. He's a guy in green. Okay, they love music and helping black people So Thomas tells them everything and they're like you know what We've all been to think talking about this and we think that black people might always face discrimination and majority white Space is just like a feeling. Yeah, yeah We're wondering if the best shot y'all have is to be in Africa where you'll be the majority Yes, yeah, no, all right. We actually sent 600 black people to a British colony called Sierra Leone to test this theory But they all died Somebody said they had vaccines and a brokered piece with the native tribes whose land we saw But the problem was that they weren't Christian enough. Yeah, of course So we want to try the Sierra Leone thing again, but where are we gonna find hundreds of black super Christians? To really locate right now. Yeah, and Thomas Peters is like whoop Exactly it. So now he's back in Nova Scotia in the scene. He's pitching David George and fill us on getting on one more boat And traveling to Africa He'll be like David fill us this time. It's gonna be so different. Yeah That gonna be like all the other times before the British government will give us land Rations and meaning this time real It's gonna be illegal slavery will be illegal there Africa was the promised land all along David will you help me get our people on board I can imagine fill us interjecting and asking the question that I'm sure we all have which is how do we know the British Gonna keep any of these problems or any of these promises or that they won't sell us back into slavery and Thomas Peters will say well Because the British promised It's time for your final major decision Your David George and fill us are you getting on one more boat Thank you go to Africa or Are you gonna stay and try to work it out in Nova Scotia? So I'm thinking I know why Thomas wants him because the nonprofit sent them to go get him And I mean I just I'm silent that I've been in so many meetings that little all those people exactly like that Some of me man had on those outfits So I'm think they you know, I know what their commitment We didn't interest all right get Thomas's interest he wants to be the one to facilitate he's a field maker David likes to think of himself as somebody he makes deals and being called so important that the Lord will call him and it's something this great in this big I think he's gonna go it's gonna be a disaster. I would not go If I'm fill this I would tell him go send me a letter tell me how it is We may send for me later. Yeah, that's where I would be right now. Your stay and put this man has pulled her from To the post where it's true she can't make any friends He's like He's never around to help with that baby But that's what I think You are getting on that boat and you're going to Sierra Leone. Let's hear it Okay, and then if you're staying in Nova Scotia. Let's hear it. All right The majority of the room is staying in Nova Scotia. This is very Canadian if you just sat Toronto voted Okay, they're all like we're done Yes, and I feel I'm feeling some kinship there with them with the Canadian. Yeah, and you know what I just realized to the other thing all that non-profit is given Thomas and them is a god They ain't got no guns. Oh, yeah, they're not equipped with them to be say and I've learned my lesson now here that like I need that, you know But yeah, no, I'm with Toronto. I feel Toronto All right, David George and Phil's decide they're in There's more fairly I was worried about this David agrees to help with promo and logistics They tell the church influencers the influencers tell their followers everyone's liking Everyone's subscribing, but then according to David The white people of Nova Scotia were very unwilling that we should go Though they had been very cruel to us and treated many of us as bad as though we had been slaves They attempted to persuade us that if we went away we should all be slaves again Without the skilled chief that's right of black loyalists the wealthy and the landowners will lose their investments and their influence So the powers that be couldn't cost elaborate bureaucratic roadblocks and spread conspiracy theories that everyone that goes in this voyage will be Staling back into slavery Nevertheless 1,196 people bought 15 ships and are out. Yeah, it sounds like more would have gone if there had been room Here's a few words about their 1792 voyage from David George found her of one of America's first black church It's survivor of one of the continents first recorded race riots and key organizers of one of the world's earliest and largest back to Africa Expeditions stunning our passage was seven weeks stormy weather There was great joy to see the land and the high mountain in the distance Free town where we now live appear like a cloud to us. I preach the first Lord's day and it was a blessed time Who makes noise fry ancestors and man All right All right, so let me tell you what happened to everybody with all these choices that you made if you ended up at number 10 that's in Sierra Leone Let's hear it all right All right, I'll visit I would definitely visit you So let me say a little about your legacy the enslaved people of America turn black loyalist of Nova Scotia turn Nova Scotian settlers Once they arrived in Sierra Leone were colonists We honor them, but we cannot ignore that fact. That's right. They end up having lots of beef with other Africans and the British and each other more church drama But they figured out they figured it out enough to make babies and today their descendants are known as the creole people of Sierra Leone Who count among their number? Idris Elba and the late great Chad with both of them It's Chad with y'all And it makes me so bad They figured it out and they came back home and they came back home Exhaust children they came back. Yes, oh Thomas Peters has a golden statue built in his honor as in the end He was their Moses who finally let them out of Egypt. Yeah, David George continued on. It's a preacher community leader in abolitionist Activist and even Harry Washington moved to Sierra Leone where he ended up taking a revolutionary stand against British influence in their colony All right, all right who ended up at number nine you stayed in Nova Scotia? So scared that's us Let's own it everybody. Let's own it Thank you All right, so this is your part of the black loyalist legacy. I feel like I ain't gonna get no chat week Both After the mass exodus of black loyalist development in shellburn stalls and the town eventually empties out Yeah, the black loyalist settlements lost half their community to the Sierra Leone expedition, but Those that remain offer refuge to other African Americans on the continent Black loyalist towns becomes some of the northern most stops on the underground railroad See you guys did it, too Okay, and estimated 50,000 enslaved people in America escape to Canada via the underground railroad But we like don't know. I mean it was a secret You know I am so afraid that I'm getting where you stuck with Drake by the way that I Can barely hear a word you're saying I am terrifying I'm not gonna give you Drake. Okay. There's okay. Don't worry about that all I've been thinking for the last three minutes That have I turned around and I see Drake That I am out of here, but okay. Okay. Oh my god Today birch town is home to the black loyalist heritage center who welcome me into their archives and have been walking me through this history since 2020 So very special thank you to black loyal scholar Graham Niccerson He was raised in shellburn actually and he never knew this history But then he became a historian and he starts working with them and then then through the book of Negroes He discovers that he is a black loyalist descendant from Virginia. No, yes, yes, we're family Are All right anyone stay in America. Oh, yeah. Oh, no, okay. I remember that was too a y'all Don't make me look at your direction But there were two Okay, all right, well let me tell you there's what there's like debate around how America has commemorated the black loyalist legacy Let me tell you the point of contention It's around the war of 1812 Okay, it was 20 years after the black loyalist left for Sierra Leone that conflicts all the U.S. and Britain face off again And slave people fight for the British on the promise of freedom again They escaped to Canada again only this time they were called the black refugees Some scholars think that the Americans possibly incensed by yet another betrayal by the people they'd enslaved Adopted an anthem with a verse that was direct threat to the black refugees and the loyalist example they'd followed Others say we can't know what this line meant and maybe the Americans had let the escapes in the fighting for the British and all that go Everybody say let it go Here's the verse No refuge could save the hirling and slave from the terror of flight or the gloom of the grave And the star spangled banner and triumphed off wave or the land of the free and the home of the brave Yeah, there's so much more that happened but for now that is the story of the black loyalist and their revolutionary quest for promise land Amazing All right, so at the end of that story how are you feeling tell us what's going on The highs and lows of that Yes, so again so many other things of I'm always struck up about this when you really do like a historical story How little things change like the political economy changes all those things change But fundamentally our conflicts are just so similar. Yes, right Computing for labor yeah using the division of race in migration status to control labor Religions role in both helping people imagine freedom and in keeping them changed To the people who enslaved them. I mean the all of the contradictions They're all there in this story and I found that so stunning and it think about it through individuals because that's all we're ever doing It's just people. Yes, trying to make choices And what really struck me about like us doing the choices there are jokes aside It's like to really we're no good choices right? Right the freedom they had gotten wasn't that there was something good necessarily waiting for them Is that they at least got to choose? Yes, that was the freedom and that's as good sometimes Maybe as we're gonna get that's it and I feel like right now in the moment we're living in that's very I maybe need to know that and they remember it That sometimes it isn't that they're in a good choices honey, it says at least I'm alive and I get to choose The my people did a lot to just be able to do that to choose between a swamp And the unknown and that's it. I'm was freedom and I don't know that feels real important to me right now That's what has the heck of a story So On the anniversary knowing that we're here. This is this is our country this is where we live is where we're from How do you Sit with your American identity? How do you make peace with it? What's your relationship to that part? Your identity? So you asked me at the top of the show what kind of a black person I am and my answer was I'm a regular black person That's also my citizenship status like if you ask me you know What kind of American I am I'm gonna tell you I'm a regular black person because to me in blackness the blackness that I come from that It's a sentence here that gets created here. You're black as the category that identity that gets created here as a response to the creation of racism That is foment it and perfected in the American contradiction of democracy and freedom is That I am the most American in that sense I only exist because America does an America only exists because I do So I just feel and I'm thinking about quite literally, you know because of the work I do they keep asking me you know contribute is to 50 things or I got I'm sure you like this. You got tons of these and you know I want to come read the declarer No, yeah I want to come read even fragile dogs who I do listen to his or you Really, you know Chilka's got a better voice for that and all that kind of thing You know could I reflect on where America is in T 50 this is what I loved about this or what do you mean reflect? You don't have to look We're not different enough. I think to be reflecting what are we What are we what are we we have the same Exodus story whether it's the civil rights movement or it was going to Nova Scotia? Yes, right you have the same Class warfare used to pull everybody back in Right to the story and the self delusion like there's so much continuity there that what feels strange to me about being asked or reflect on 250 is I mean are we different enough to warrant reflection is it enough to just Read the news Right if I can pick up the newspaper at any point in this country's history and see the same story What am I reflecting on reflection is for when you have distance Yeah, I reflect on relationship once it's over You know, we're still in it. What's the reflection? But who the? We still doing the thing we are we really are still just doing the thing. Oh My goodness, trust me. This has been such a pleasure. This is the most fun Listen and I had high expectation This was better than I could have ever imagined and I want to say two quick things I've been holding this whole time one your family is too pretty there such an attractive little family so cute I did I've been wanting to say that for like an hour and the second thing I wanted to say was when I think the inevitable happens when you become a really big deal in star will you just please Just you know still you know send me a little invite to the show No It is not just that this is good You are good You're good, so when they never happen. It's just Forever All I know that's all I asked put me on an occasional look this somewhere you're always on it. You're always on it Everybody heard it's official It's official. Thank you And thanks y'all y'all were so fun. This was so fun. Thanks for coming out. It's amazing This episode was written researched produced and performed by MENA Cole Hill Thank you eternally to trusty and McMillan caught him for your wisdom and your heart It was such an honor. It was such a privilege Everybody do yourself a favor right now follow her on all the social media reader books and her writings Listen to her interviews. You will be a better person for it. Thank you to my a team That's my day one executive producer Adriana and breeze and the newest member of the team You've actually heard him on the show before He is known for so many incredible things, but what I love the most is his commitment to tell The stories of regular black people everywhere all throughout time He's been a tremendous champion of this podcast and of me. I am so thrilled to welcome our newest executive producer Jason Reynolds. Thank you to Davy Sumner for mixing and mastering and scouring music databases for gospel piano music It's hard in and it should be but I appreciate you making it happen Thank you to Martina Abrahamsey Lunga for story editing in the South of Smith for show art a very special Thank you to Gio Kiyanson for research production and voice talent and for organizing this taping of our ancestors Remesie at the ICFVCU Thank you to the entire team there for handling little justics so beautifully Thank you Lisa Wolfork for managing the slideshow your timing was impeccable Thank you to Jim and bushkeeper fact checking a very special thank you to my guide through all this history Canada's own Graham knickersin black loyal scholar and public historian We are completely independent show if you would like to support us you can join the household at our ancestors Remesie dot supercast dot com and get access to bonus in behind the scenes content and support the future of the show To learn more about us you can visit our ancestors Remesie dot com before I go I'll just say this I'm a storyteller by training. I'm a history curator in part because of posts like this one from Ben O'Cree Stories can conquer fury you know they can make the heart bigger happy to 50th y'all