The New York Times app has all the stuff that you may not have seen. The way the tabs are at the top with all of the different sections. I can immediately navigate to something that matches what I'm feeling. I owe the games always. Don't want the money, don't want the word. I love how much content it exposed me to. Things that I never would have thought to turn to a news app for. This app is essential. The New York Times app. All of the times, all in one place. Download it now at nytimes.com slash app. Amongst philosophers who study dementia, there's this story that gets told over and over again. And it's about a woman named Margo. Margo was a 55 year old woman who suffered from early onset Alzheimer's disease. She couldn't recognize anyone around her. She spent her days painting and listening to music. She read mystery novels too. Often the same book day after day. The mystery always remained mysterious because she would forget it. But despite her on this, or maybe even because of it, Margo was very happy. The Margo story presents philosophers with this riddle. Imagine that years ago when Margo was fully competent, she wrote out a formal document explaining that if she ever developed Alzheimer's disease, she would not want any life-saving medical treatment. And more than that, she would want to be killed, as soon and as painlessly as possible. This poses that question, which version of the Margo should be listened to, the then Margo before she got sick, the then Margo who never would want to live that way, or the now Margo who's sitting before us and who is by all accounts, happy, in other words, who is the authentic Margo? New York Times, I'm Michael Babaro. This is the Daily. Across the United States, millions of families are confronting a seemingly impossible question. When dementia changes a relative, how much should they accommodate their new personality, and their new desires? Today, Times Magazine correspondent Katie Engelhardt, with one family's experience. It's Friday, January 26th. Katie, how did you first discover this story? So, I spent a number of years reporting on issues related to older Americans, and I've been particularly interested in dementia and cognitive impairment. And this story actually found me because I've been writing about the subject. I was receiving a lot of emails from people who had dementia, who's loved ones had it, and there was one that really stood out to me. And that was an email from two women, Chris and Julie Norellius, who were writing to tell me the story of their mother. And what was the story that they told you? The story that they described was, effectively, one of elder abuse. In this case, what they were describing wasn't physical abuse, or even kind of direct financial abuse, but something a little softer, more like psychological pressure, more like taking advantage of someone's cognitive weakness in order to convince that person that she wants something she doesn't really. But the more I reported on this story, the more complicated it seems. This wasn't a straightforward story of elder abuse with good guys and bad guys. This was a lot more complicated. We can all hear each other. Yeah, yeah. Great. Thank you so much for being willing to try to get him. So the first thing I did was call these sisters, Chris and Julie Norellius, and that really started two years of conversation with them. Sure, starting someplace, Chris and Julia separated by a few years, but they act almost like twins. Oh, wow. Well, they look similar. They have virtually the same voice. They complete each other sentences. And they told me a lot about their family, the Norellius family. I grew up in Dennis and Iowa, a town of around 8,000 people surrounded on all sides by corn fields. Their father Bill was sort of a prominent figure around town. He was a lawyer and a landowner. But we spent most of our time talking about their mother, day in Norellius. My mom was really the center of our family. The sisters described their mother as really the backbone of this happy American family. Dad worked all the time, and so it was up to mom to take care of everything else. And it was a great childhood. She was my memory. Competent. And you know, a big presence in the area. She served on a school board. She drove a school bus. She was on the state library board. But she was also a very traditional woman. You know, she was a woman of her time. Mom and dad were married in 1957. So it was very much in 1950's wife at home with the children husband working. And she was by her daughter's admission quite happy in that role. It was all it was very proper and mom just cried in that. And probably would have continued that way if things hadn't derailed. What exactly happened? Things for Diane really changed in 2011. Her husband Bill died of complications from a broken hip after 53 years of marriage. You have to remember that mom went to nursing school. God out and pretty much married dad. I mean, she was in her early 20s when she had me. So she had never lived alone been independent or anything. So what she loses is man who has been there for her whole life. Literally, her adult life. I think she was like lost. I mean, she pretended like, don't worry kids, I'll be fine. But I don't think she knew how to do it by herself, especially without a man. And by doing it, you mean. Live her life like she made it out like, oh, I feel kind of free now. And I can go and do anything I want, but she really didn't. She just watched television. And then Diane started losing more people. To me, the next thing was my brother's health crisis. Her son Eric died of cancer at 55. That's her only son. That's one of her children. Her daughter Julie, who had lived next door, divorced and moved to Colorado. Her support group has kind of turned mine. I think abandoned her. She was seeing herself alone. And then almost all of a sudden, a new man appears in her life. And then a long came Denzel. Denzel Nelson. Denzel was known to the family. Denzel Nelson was my father-in-law when I was married to his son. He was actually Julie's ex-husband's father. So a man she'd once been very close with, but hadn't seen much of since her divorce. He always had cowboy boots and a cowboy snap down and then a cowboy hat on. Was this kind of stocky cowboy figure? He'd worked as a horseshoeer for most of his life, but it's since retired. I mean, it was a completely different image, you know, in comparison to my father. I mean, there were, like, opposites. He was three times divorced. And actually, because he had no finances, he asked if there was any chance he could live in the hired man's house next door to my mom. And coming off his last divorce, he moved into a little property on the Nurelius farm plot. In exchange for helping maintain the yard, like do the mowing, and help out with yard work and things there that he could help with. But by all accounts, he and Diane weren't especially close. Well, she studied with disgusting. He dressed like a kick, mom used to work here, and she just thought he was kind of repulsive. She said he smelled bad. She said he'd stop by for coffee sometimes and she wished that he wouldn't. So they certainly weren't close by any means until seemingly out of nowhere, Diane's views on Denzel completely changed. It was a Sunday, I call mom and the woman talking to me was not my mom. And she was like, I need to tell you something. And then she went on to say, I've invited Denzel to share my life and live in my house with me. I'm sure my mouth dropped open because I was like, what is happening? She goes, I need you to accept him and love him and welcome him into our family because this is what I want. Their mother called them up and sort of presented this is a done deal. And I run love, he's moving into the house, he's the love of my life. It was hard. It was hard to swallow. It really was, but. But Chris and Julie tried to be accepting of this. You know, for mom's sake, we all adapted. So things were okay for a while and Diane, you know, she seemed happy. She and Denzel started spending their days on on these drives. They drive around the state or to different states. They go to antique shows or horses or quilt shows. You know, at age 80, Diane was finding a new way to live. But Diane's daughter's also noticed changes in her that they found more worrying. My mom always was a fashionista. She used to make her own clothing suits. My mother had always been very well dressed, very, you know, interested in her appearance. But then I came home and she's wearing jeans with a big wide cowboy belt. And it's a little cruddy horse breeders baseball cap. All of a sudden she was dressing like a cowboy and no makeup, no makeup. And I was just like, who are you? And some of the changes were deeper ones. And she said to me one day, you know, I'm trying to be more assertive. Denzel's training need to be more assertive. Chris and Julie really felt like their joyful joyous mother was growing. Mom was a sour. She was being aggressive and mean to people. Even Diane's phone calls with her daughters were changing. They started to be this gradual isolation that mom wasn't calling as much. I'd call her and oh, she'd be busy. I'll have her call you back. They're finding it harder to reach their mother. She's not answering the phone when she does answer the phone. It seems as if Denzel's always beside her, always sort of coaching her almost on what to say. But I think it was harder and harder for her to understand our conversations when we would talk. They sort of feel like their mother is deteriorating and ways they can't quite understand from far away. But it's only in September of 2017 that a doctor finally gives shape to what Diane's daughters sort of both knew and couldn't see. I couldn't get a hold of mom and was worried about her. And I got a phone call from Denzel that said mom was in the hospital. He didn't think it was her heart. They weren't sure. Denzel had taken Diane to the emergency room because she felt short of breath. And at the hospital she was given a cognitive test. She scored poorly. She didn't know the name of the president for instance. I decided, you know what, I'm going back to Iowa and I got a plane ticket. Chris actually got a plane ticket too, but I got back there before Chris. So I went to the hospital met with mom. The doctor in groom came in and explained to me that, yeah, you know, your mother, he had diagnosed her with dementia. And it's here at this time that Diane is diagnosed with dementia. That was the day we went to Vicki's house. Vicki was kind of a friend to mom and to us and we were so shocked. We're sitting at her bar crying and she's like, well, of course your mom has dementia. I don't know that. We've known that for years. It's around the time that she receives that diagnosis that Diane starts rearranging her affairs. That's when Denzel was added to the bank accounts. She gives Denzel her financial power of attorney. He was a signer. He could post sign on mom's checks. She redrafts her will so that if she dies before Denzel, he is the right to live on her property. Basically, it gives Denzel control of almost everything. And she also dissolves her financial trust. This is the trust that her daughter Julie managed, which holds all of her assets and all of her investments. And when Julie checks Diane's bank statements, she starts seeing cash withdrawals of hundreds of dollars at a time. This was especially worrying because they knew that their mother was worth around $4 million. When that Denzel, you know, three times divorced her retired horseshoe or was worth basically nothing. Denzel had taken mom's phones away. We couldn't talk to her in the phone. We didn't know if she was dead or alive. He wouldn't respond to us anymore. We were scared. All of this just leads Chris and Julie to the conclusion that they need to get to the bottom of what's been happening. It's just sitting in the chair in my living room and it's like something swept over me and said you need to go to Iowa right now. So what do they decide to do? Their first step is to call a lawyer and the lawyer recommended that they obtain what's called a temporary protective order. Basically an emergency restraining order that would force Denzel to move out of the house and stay away from Diane. And the sisters hoped really give them a chance to sit down with their mother away from Denzel's influence and really get to the bottom of what was happening. And that's what the restraining order would in theory do. Right. It wouldn't get Denzel arrested, but it would get him out of the house. That's right. So as a lawyer sort of working away on this paperwork, Chris and Julie get in a flight home to Iowa. It was I think on a Thursday that we flew into Omaha. It's October 2017. They drive up to the old farmhouse. Our level of fear driving up that driveway was unreal because we didn't know how Denzel was going to react. We didn't know how soon the police were going to be there walking up to that door was the most frightening moment of my life. And as I door, they described your mother answering and her initial response to them being there as to hesitate. She just stood there and said, Mom, can we come in? And she goes, oh, yeah, you know, like she was startled. Like, of course, you can come in when the daughters walk into the house. They are shocked by what they see this farmhouse, which was once scrupulously tidy. This looks uncamped. In the kitchen, the landline phone is missing and the shelves are basically bare. The only food that Diane seems to have in the house is a freezer full of ice cream cones. On the stove, there's this piece of masking tape with Denzel's handwriting on it. It says, do not use in big letters. On the door frame, there's this piece of wood that's just blocking access to the staircase. When we go in, we find our mom and keep the bowl of doing anything or understanding why we're there or anything. And their mother just seems completely out of it. Her curly white hair, which is usually perfectly styled and puffed is flat around her neck as if it hasn't been washed. Her watch is on upside down. Her words come out slurred, eventually Diane kind of gives up and goes into the bedroom and just lies face down on her bed. So, Chris and I just tried to make conversation hoping in praying that the police would come driving up the driveway. And as expected, the daughters, two sheriff's deputies pull up. And I looked at Chris like, oh, you know, because I didn't know how he was going to react. I was terror. The deputies explained that under the terms of the order, Denzel would be immediately removed from Diane's home and, quote, we're strained from committing further acts of abuse or threats of elder abuse charges that Denzel immediately denied. Chris went straight back to the bedroom so that she could be with mom because I said, I don't want mom to be upset or to wake up to any of what's going on. So, in this sister's telling Denzel runs into Diane's bedroom where she's sleeping. And he's screaming at my mom, Diane, Diane, do you know what those girls have done? Do you know what they're doing to me? Start screaming at the top of his lungs. It was utter chaos. And then his sort of force to leave them. The look on his face when he walked up that door was, I wish you were dead. He was furious. I don't think Chris and Julie really had plans for what would come next. And I think what surprised the most on that initial day was that none of the seem to register for Diane at all. You know, when the police left, she fell asleep. The first thing she said when she woke up from her nap despite having witnessed, you know, this whole scene before her was, where's Denzel? She asked it again and she asked it again and all evening and in the middle of the night in the next day too. She didn't even know where he had gone. And I think the daughters, you know, they tried to explain to their mother what was happening. Can I ask a question? Yeah, but you don't necessarily get an answer. Well, later I listened to this long conversation that Chris recorded on her phone. Did you terminate my general power of attorney? And you can hear Chris and Julie, you know, ask questions of their mother. You mean general power of attorney? I had it. I know I terminated my trust, but did you also terminate my power of attorney? What is the problem with the nap tonight? I don't know. Okay. Hi. And Diane's responses are really shocking. She says, you know, what's the power of attorney? Mm-hmm. And there are changes. She doesn't remember making. You know, I could grasp nothing about the trust. Oh, my gosh. It was there. And you know, you rolled it up. And that's. I've never told anything from your 12. She's using it. But, well, Diane clearly doesn't understand, you know, the precise financial and legal decisions that she made. Her motivation is very clear. Um, a long time ago when after that died, we did this. You asked me. You said mom, you know, when you want to take care of her trust. I looked at you and I said, honey, I don't know if I know the first thing about that sort of thing. Um, do you want to go there? You said you'd be happy too. And I said, okay. I have. Inter? So, um, I can remember saying that. But now, I've got the feeling. And it has nothing to do with them, so. Uh, he's got his own money. I've got my own money. Uh, I want to be able to be my own person before I die. She tells her daughters. I want to make my own decisions. I want to be in charge of myself until I die. I knew that I had given you control of, of that for me, because back before. Because I didn't have a clue in my mind. I wasn't working very well. Anyway, um, probably better than anything. But, uh, I want to be. I'm pushing. I'm realizing Katie in this moment that I don't really understand what the law. Has to say about this complicated situation. I mean, here, Diane is asking to see Denzel, who has just been removed from the house per that protective order. And Diane is taking actions like giving him power of attorney. But she's been given a diagnosis of dementia. And that recording you heard, so just she didn't even understand what power of attorney is at this moment. Both of which runs contrary to the idea that she's. Really capable of being in control of her life and these kinds of decisions. So what does the law say about that? Yeah, this definitely confused Diane's daughter. And it confuses a lot of adult children of people with dementia. Adult children often assume that, you know, the moment a doctor pronounces a person to have dementia. That kind of flips a decisional switch. And all of a sudden, that person is now legally and medically. Incapable of choosing for herself anymore. The reality is that there's no such switch within modern medicine. Patients are never declared completely competent or incompetent in some holistic sense. Instead, doctors are asked to look at individual choices and whether or not a person is able to make a specific choice in a specific moment. And this in practice can mean that a person with dementia can retain the ability to make choices for many years and then lose the ability and stages. So lose the ability to make complex choices first and then simple once later. And this is important from a legal perspective too, because it means that people with dementia retain the ability to make legal choices, even when they are cognitively impaired. But of course, this often creates conflicts within families because there's no clear cut medical way to determine without error that a person is capable of making a specific choice. So based on what you said, the daughter's options would seem to be pretty limited here. So what is their next move? It's clear to Chris and Julie that their mother had been very effective at hiding the extent of her impairment from them. At this point, Diana is still speaking well and she can be engaged in conversation. So her daughter's decided that it's probably going to be important for them to get some evidence that their mother is actually very sick. And their decision is to bring her to the University of Iowa hospitals in clinic where they know there's a dedicated geriatric psychiatrist unit where their mother can get a more formal assessment. And so we sat mom done and explained it to her as best we could without having a sound scary, like we're taking you to a hospital. And they're telling Diana agrees to go, she helps to pack her bag, she gets into the car. And they all started on this hours long drive to the hospital. Everything stayed quiet in the car for quite a while. We got to Des Moines and my phone rang and it was our attorney's mother who's a nurse. It's some time around sunset. And mom said, who is that? I said, I mean, what could I talk to her? Of course. That Diana starts getting upset. So she gets the phone, I mean, I'm being kidnapped. Please call the police, come and get me, I'm being kidnapped and I lean. At some point, she throws a book at Julie. She starts hitting Chris and I had to grab her wrist to keep her from continuing to hit me. She's screaming that she doesn't know where she is and is being, you know, driven somewhere against her will. Yes, it was terrifying. Physically, it's the voice, it's the body, it's everything that nurtured you before. And suddenly, it's like she's possessed. After a few minutes of this, the sisters decide they're going to call an ambulance and have an ambulance drive Diane the rest of the way to the hospital. When they get there, Diane's given a cognitive assessment. And what's shocking is that, you know, while Diane has been operating more or less normally in her life, she actually has very significant deficits. The neuropsychologist who tests her describes deficits in almost every field that he tests for and decides that Diane is unable to safely perform tasks as complex as preparing a meal. In his final report, he describes Diane as having significantly limited capacity for informed personal, medical and financial decision making. Later, a doctor helps to kind of interpret these findings and she uses the phrase Alzheimer's disease for the first time in her view. Diane is already at a late moderate stage. So far beyond the kind of mild forgetfulness that it started to worry her daughters. So the kids wanted to know how bad things had gotten for their mom. And now they know, I mean, they have a very serious diagnosis now. Right, and that really convinces them that they need to take control of the situation in a more formal way. So talking to their lawyer, Chris and Julie decide that they're going to focus on getting legal guardianship of their mother, which will effectively give them control over many of her personal and medical choices. And they're convinced that, you know, this will be a fairly straightforward case and that once they get guardianship, they'll be able to kind of fix everything. But it's also at this point that their personal relationship with their mother really evaporates. Diane is moved from the hospital to an assisted living facility in Denison. And because the elder abuse charges again, Stenzel had been dropped, she's able to start seeing him again. And once that happens, Diane quickly makes the choice to stop seeing her children. She tells pretty much everyone she knows, everyone she sees that she wants nothing to do with them, that she doesn't want them to visit. At one point, she even tells a friend, she doesn't have daughters anymore. Hello. Hey, dental. Hey. There's this recording of a phone call. I'm not sure where to start. So I'll tell you what I've planned on saying, and that is that I would be happy to sit down and talk with you and Nana. Well, I don't know. I'll have to get back to you. Please let me tell my grandmother the same thing. How would you tell her? Julie's daughter Hayley calls her grandmother Diane and tries to mediate the situation. You know, I know. Hi. Over the course of the call, you really hear Hayley try to make the case that I love all of my family. I love you both. I love my mother and aunt. You know, this has just got out of control, Chris and Julie. I love their mother. I need you both to know, and I need especially dental to know that from my perspective, there are opportunities for everybody to come together. And everybody to be happy, especially Nana. There's got to be some way to resolve this. It's up to Nana, whether she accepts them again. Not family. It's up to Nana. And she has chosen to sing and choose to write more to Hayley. And Diane, for her part, she speaks very loosely. I need you way out of this, and there is no. I can't handle much more. But in the early way, I can get rid of that stress. It's a bit of constant stress. She says quite clearly. There's not a way to move on. I'm just saying my life is the only thing I can do is break into the night after the sex. I'm sorry. Don't be angry. I'm watching her and I love to go to my parents. Well, do you want to go back? Hi, Mr. Nelson. Thanks so much for getting back to me again. Can you hear me, okay? Yes. Okay, great. And thanks for this. So Katie, you were eventually spoke with Denzel about how he saw his relationship with Diane and with her family. So in his mind, how did all of this play out? So that's also describes falling in love is sort of set in and unexpected. Well, one day I decided I just going to go for a match. And Diane was out working at the art. She says, what are you up to? And I said, you know, it's a nice day. I'm going to get in the truck and just go for a garage. When I first got in touch with him on the phone, he told me this. Long story about falling in love with Diane and his truck. I said, you want to come along? And she said, well, where are you going? I said, I don't know. She said, well, yeah. And that day they took their first drive. Soon one drive became regular drives and a longer drive. They took trips to horseshoes and quilt shows and antique sales all around the state. One of the first trips we made. And I took a name because her husband was in the journey. And every trip they ever went on, they had to be certain set your place because they had them all down. You know, these trips were themselves kind of an entirely new experience for Diane. And the first trip we went on when we just dug off. She says, where are we staying? And I said, well, or you want to stay? Diane, he said, was amazed to learn that Denzel never booked a motel room in advance. He just got in his car and drove and drove until he felt like stopping. And then he'd stay at whatever motel happened to have space. So she liked how it was kind of more spontaneous traveling with you. And he used to deal with something that just really tickled. And Denzel says that on those longer trips, they would sometimes stay overnight at a motel. In the beginning, of course, they're just friends. So they would sleep in two separate beds. He talked about leaving the room to go outside. Well, she got dressed and he'd do the same for her. But then one night, as he told it, Diane just climbed out of her bed and into his arms. He thought at that moment about how she was the gentlest person he'd ever met. Finally one day. Well, anyway, we ended up in the big house. And I was invited. And so this relationship just blossomed. We had some really, a couple, three, really good years there. Oh, 2013 until the salt made the fan. When Denzel moved in, you know, he knew that Diane's daughter is weren't really accepting of the relationship. First, never did like the idea that I was living in her dad's house. But he also didn't really care. You know, it wasn't her dad's house anymore. It was her mother's house. I think Denzel felt like, you know, Diane was a grown woman. And she was entitled to make her own decisions. And it didn't really bother him. A couple of daughters who lived out of state approved of him or not. But later, I think Denzel started to butt heads more with Chris and Julie. It seemed to him that Diane's daughters were interested in controlling things for their mother. You know, he was surprised to learn that even Diane's social security check went straight into an account that was managed by Julie. And he described being sort of disturbed to learn that whenever Diane wanted to do anything major, like, create in her car for when she liked better. She had to go through Julie who was the trustee of her trust. Did it bother her that Julie was kind of in charge of things or did she like it because it was easier? No, she hated it. Yeah. She was perfectly able to take care of her own bills and everything. I'm curious what Denzel's interpretation and recollection is of the day that Diane's daughters show up with that order, forcing him to leave the house. I think he was completely amazed by it. I was a woman and I saw Chris and Julie come up to the door. And I told Diane, I says, there's going to be trouble. He didn't see it coming at all. And then the sheriff showed up and they had a restraining order and they hauled me out of the house. And I heard Chris tell Diane, Denzel did something illegal and you're never going to see it. In Denzel's version of events, he doesn't resist at all. He goes into Diane's bedroom to say goodbye to her. I told Diane, I said, he tough on me. He gathers his various medications and gets into his car and drives away. And I think Denzel was completely taken aback when he heard the specific charges that he was accused of. A charge to us, elderly abuse, just one lie around after another. Certainly the phrase elder abuse struck him as being entirely inappropriate. Denzel ended up giving me a copy of his diary from that time. And he called them the sin sisters kind of coming in and making up stories about him hurting this person who he loved more than anyone else. They said, I want to see him right or we weren't even right. Yeah, that's what that's the lies they told. And he had his own explanation for things. At the time, we went out to eat because we could. And I and it took our lives as for the cupboards being there. Well, Denzel said the cupboards were there because he knew that Diane had spent 50 years of life cooking for other people. And he thought it would be nice for her to be taken care of. They said there was some mold in there and there was no mold. And he said for the house being dirty again, he said it looked okay to him. But anyway, he didn't like to see Diane on our hands and knees scrubbing the floor. And anytime he did, he told her to get up and not worry about it. He would take care of things. So Denzel, you know, he left the house as he was forced to do. But I think from that moment, he had every intention to fight Diane's daughters for what he saw as Diane's. Freedom and liberation. What about the decline of her memory? Which, of course, is that the heart of all the legal maneuvers that his daughters are undertaking? What does he say about that? He really denies that at this time, Diane was sick. No, he was not having any memory issues. So the student, in your opinion, she didn't really have dementia right when this all started. She got it later. No, no. Sure, he noticed Diane was a little less steady on her feet. You know, maybe her memory wasn't what it was at the age of 30 or 40. But he didn't see it as being some big, serious thing. A lot of people have a bit of dementia. And I think his view was that Diane was more or less unchanged and certainly not changed to the point where she needed someone to be caring for her all of the time. He was prepared to care for her in whatever way he said she needed. So what does Denzel do after he and Diane are forcefully separated? So the first thing he does is leave the house is he's ordered to do. He moves in with his son. I thought it went nuts. I mean, can connect with her, can call her or not. But once Diane's transferred to the assisted living facility, he's given visitation rights again. And he serves visiting her every day. Most morning, I'm an early rise. I always have been. I wake up at 4 o'clock. I don't hear what time it would have been. And so I've been around until 7 when I get to go out there and go to breakfast with her. He shows up at 7 a.m. He says he's 12 hours. He goes for a little walks for her around the building. He calculates that if they walk around the building 10 times, it's a mile, not walk a twice. He sits with her while she naps. We played a lot of cards and watched TV. Set out in the board swimming. And he says the often times in the night, he would get a call from the assisted living facility. And another so tell him that Diane was crying. Crying 2 a.m. 3.m. that she was crying and she wouldn't stop and they'd ask if he could come. But many nights it felt me that Diana was feeling a bad time. What was she was it just because she was sick or she was lonely, do you think? She just was what her daughter spent to her. And that maybe they tried to call that day or something that she wouldn't talk to them and then she'd be thinking about it. Yeah. How would you settle her down? Hug her. Yes, sure. Tell her everything was going to be alright. And as Denzel tells it, you know, Diana's very clear throughout this whole time that she loves him. That she wants to be with him and that more than that she doesn't want to see her daughter anymore. And Denzel sees it for himself. He says, you know, when Chris and Julie call, Diane's asked if she wants to take the call, she always says no. It's Christmas approaches, Diane, since word to where daughter's through her lawyer is that she doesn't want to see them at all. And I think Denzel really feels heading into the guardianship case that he's a really good chance of winning because isn't it obvious? Diane is telling everyone that she wants Denzel and shouldn't it be her choice? Well, eventually a court had to make that decision. Tell us what happened during this trial over guardianship for Diane. Well, in a way, this kind of routine trial in this small town in Iowa became this larger philosophical debate over which version of Diane should be listened to. No, Chris and Julie made the point that their mother had for years told them if she ever got dementia, they should be the ones to take care of her. She trusted them to make the right decision for her. Denzel, on the other hand, argued that none of that really mattered because the version of Diane who was sitting in front of them all was saying something very different. She was saying she wanted him. So in the end, it was a question of what does Diane really want? Is it what she's saying she wants there in the moment in court? Or is it what she said consistently for all the years before her mind became impaired? And ultimately what does the judge decide? In the end, neither of those two sides wins. The judge decides that Chris and Julie won't be suitable guardians in part because they live out of state, but also because they don't seem to be taking their mothers wishes into consideration when making decisions for her. On the other hand, the judge thinks Denzel will be unsuitable because he really seems to underappreciate how sick Diane is. He says over and over in court that she's not sick at all as far as he knows. So the judge takes this middle course in a points one of Diane's friends. Marshall Losh is the guardian. Hmm. And what do both sides end up making of that middle course starting with Denzel? I think he still feels liberated by the decision. That's who Diane wanted when they asked Diane, would she like your guardian? She said Marshall. He's friendly with all the news appointed guardian. And with her permission, he gains the right to see Diane whenever he wants, also to move back into her house. I was there three times a day to see her with children. Three times a day. And so he kind of continues doing what he'd been doing before visiting her every day, spending the day. I mean, I knew she was getting worse. That dementia only went one way. Yeah. And I get delighted when I get there. He does start to notice at this time that Diane isn't what she used to be. Well, I don't remember what her makeup wanted. I think that was my first thing I noticed. It sort of starts with her makeup. I mean, she was a very attractive lady. She was a rich and a father that she can turn hands, you know, or shaken. And so I actually helped her put her makeup on. I probably didn't do a real good job. But I helped her put her makeup on every morning. And as Diane's dementia got worse, she's moved to a different facility, and nursing home with a specialized memory care unit. But Denzel keeps visiting her there, and his visits continue until 2020. The pandemic. The COVID. Yeah. When the COVID started again, you know, I couldn't get her out of here anymore. Diane, some days seem to understand what was going on, but other times seemed to know nothing of the pandemic. And it got to her results. She would see time. She said, I know you can get in here. You just don't want to, you know, not really hurt. Because she understood COVID at first, but then they got to receive it and understand the COVID. Yeah. She accused Denzel of choosing not to visit her of being allowed to come inside, but not wanting to. We just had a really good few years here. But that all ended. That dementia is, to me, is worse than cancer. And then eventually it became less clear to Denzel that Diane always knew who he was. And it was around that time. He says that he stopped visiting. And it's an untidy goodbye. And it's incomplete. It's just one day of as it is hard. And then that's the last that Denzel ever sees Diane again. So let's return to Chris and to Julie. What do they do after they find out about the judges decision in the guardian case? So Chris and Julie go back to their respective homes. And immediately they start working on an appeal, but they also continued this relentless sort of effort to get in touch with their mother. But their calls wouldn't be put through. They'd get friends to call to sometimes and just try desperately to get word of Diane. And none of that worked until. This is Erin. Can I help you? Hi, Erin. Can I speak to Diane in a real, yes, please? Yes, just in it. Okay. One day, Julie's friend Mary calls the nursing home and to everyone's surprise. She's put through to Diane. Hello, Diane. This is Mary. I called you last week. Yeah. How are you doing today? I'm fine. You're getting better. Okay. Mary and Diane were able to talk a couple of times. And it was clear that Diane's cognition was very diminished at this point. She seemed confused a lot of what she said. Didn't make a lot of sense. But what was clear was that she was unhappy where she was living in this basement unit of the local nursing home. So I called your daughter, Julie, and she's finding you a different place to live. Yes. Oh, my goodness. I was able to listen to one of the calls. And on it, Mary tells Diane that she's been in touch with Chris and Julie, and that they're going to try to get her move to a different better facility. Well, don't cry. Don't cry. Diane just breaks down in tears. And she says it would be so wonderful. And she's so happy to hear that her daughters are maybe going to help her. Hmm. They're going to come and see you as soon as they can, you know. Is that okay? Yeah. Absolutely. They haven't come and see you. But at the end of the call. Okay, Diane. I'm going to let you go. I'm going to call Julie right now. Okay. And then, and then I'll call you back. Thank you. You're welcome. You're at the same time. Diane forgets to hang up. And Mary just sort of stays on the line for a few minutes. And you can hear Diane crying softly in the background. And then sitting in silence for a while. Okay. And then you can hear a nurse come in and she asked Diane if she's okay. Okay. She tells the nurse, they hate me. They call me bad things. So in September 2020, a court finally agrees to Chris and Julie's request that Diane be moved to a more specialized facility in Omaha. Almost immediately after arriving, she is put on hospice care. Doctors decide that she is dying and doesn't have very long to live. And it was then that a judge finally signs this order granting Chris and Julie the right to see their mother for the first time in over two years because of the state Diane's end. Chris is, I mean, compromised and decided that it wasn't safe for her to travel during the pandemic, but Julie gets in her truck and she drives nine hours to Nebraska. Walking through her threshold, I mean, the anxiety, the fear of, you know, I haven't seen mom put Chris three years and seen my mother. And she ends up spending four. And she describes them completely pleasant and wonderful days with Diane. I went in and mom was in bed. She was very weak. But I sat beside her. She sat up. We talked. We hugged. We kissed. We giggled. And she was so happy. And then we she laid down and I tucked her in under her little blanket. And she said, oh, stay here by me. Stay here. So she helped my hand. And I just laid down beside her. And sometimes Julie says, Diane seems to, maybe ask about Denzel. She asks, where's that man? Where's that man? A few times. But she never calls him by name. I can't tell you how hard it was to have to leave that last day. When I left, the feeling I had was that this is how it should have been from the beginning. In January of 2021, Chris and Julie are granted guardianship of Diane. And they call each other. They can't believe this is finally happened. They start planning a trip together to see their mother. But four days later before they could take that trip. Diane dies at the nursing home. Katie, it occurs to me that in the story that you have just told everybody involved was hurt in some way. And hurt deeply. The daughters, Denzel, Diane. So how do you think about why there was so much pain in this story? Is this really about bad decisions made by the people that we have been talking about? Or is this about a bad system that we have for handling people with dementia? Or is it both? I think as a journalist, I often write stories where there are, and the end, good guys and bad guys. And that's not how I felt in this case. I really felt that everyone involved in this story was kind of arguing and fighting in good faith. Everyone loved Diane. I think, you know, in part there are weaknesses in the system. I mean, if you look at someone who has dementia, that person might live with the diagnosis for years slowly deteriorating. And there's no clear and obvious and easy to measure point at which a person with dementia loses the ability to do something for herself and then loses the legal right to do it. I think that's just an inherent difficulty with the disease. The medical system can try and the court system can try to locate that point, but it's not going to be easy. And certainly a person with dementia, a person like Diane, can remember things and forget things and remember again in the course of a day. So what do you do with that? But I think beyond that, in many ways, Denzel and Diane's daughters were just living with different versions of the same woman. And I think given how they knew Diane, this is understandable, the daughters were committed to the then version of their mother, the pre-dimension version of their mother, the one they lived with for decades, the one who had been clear about what she wanted at the end of her life. And they felt obliged to even when that woman seemed to disappear to recall her and to honor her what she wanted. And Denzel, on the other hand, only had the woman who was sitting in front of him at the moment and he felt that he loved her and that the right thing to do was to listen to her, to listen to what she was saying and to take it at face value, not as some pathological symptom of a cognitive impairment. And so he was in a way advocating for the Diane who was diminished. And I think even amongst academics who debate this, you know, this is a contested subject. Who's the authentic person? Who in this case was the real Diane? I mean, have you come to conclusion of your own? After spending all this time with the family, with Denzel and with the documents? I mean, which one was the real Diane? The one the kids remembered and wanted to honor or the one who fell in love with Denzel? I think it's hard to say who the real Diane was. But I do know that as a society, as a, with our medical system and our legal system, as they are, we're moving in the direction of honoring Denzel's version of Diane. It used to be, you know, in the early 20th century, that just having a diagnosis of dementia, basically meant that you were stripped of all your decision-making power, stripped of all your civil liberties and put under the control of other people. And we've moved away from that system and we've moved towards a world in which we hope, even people with significant disabilities and impairments can live with some autonomy. And in the case of dementia, that means increasingly listening to what a person with dementia says she wants, even if it's different from what she said she wanted for decades and decades of her life. And I think that is understandable from a, you know, political or legal standpoint, but very, very challenging for the adult children of people with a disease. Right, because they have to live with the reality that the now version of their mother, or their father, or their sister, or their brother, is the one that the system privileges and prioritizes. Yeah, and I think it can be terrifying for, you know, the rest of us too. We can tell our children what we want to happen to us when we're older and the event that we get sick. We can write up documents, outlining our wishes, but in the end, they might just not be listened to, because in the throws of the disease, we might change our minds. And that can be very scary, you know, I feel like I know who I am. And it's, it's frightening the thought that some different impaired version of me might actually, have both the ethical and the legal authority to, you serve what I decide I want. Okay, Dee, thank you very much. I appreciate it. Thank you for having me. We'll be right back. Here's what else you need to know today. U.S. officials and outside experts tell the times that North Korea's leader, Kim Jong-ul, has shifted to a policy of open hostility towards South Korea, and could take some sort of lethal military action against the country in the coming months. They said that Kim has been emboldened by a growing partnership with Russia and by his conclusion that the United States military is in global retreat since withdrawing from Afghanistan in 2022. Today's episode was produced by Luke Vanderplug, with help from Claire Tenisketter and Diana Winn. It was edited by Michael Benwak, contains original music by Dan Powell, Mary Elizano, Pat McCusker and Diana Waw, and was engineered by Alyssa Moxley. Our theme music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben Lancefrog of Wonderland. That's it for the Daily. I'm Michael Waw. See you on Monday.